
Subject: I have just been caught speeding

Q. I think I may have been caught speeding by a camera, how can I challenge this ?
Ans. If you have been caught speeding you may receive a Notice of Intended Prosecution within 14 days of the offence. If you have not received this it is unlikely that you will face prosecution for the offence. If you have been caught speeding, the prosecution must prove that the camera has received Home Office approval; that on the day you were allegedly speeding that the camera was working properly; that the road you were driving on had a speed limit and that you were the driver of the vehicle. If a prosecution for speeding is brought against you, then you can challenge it on these grounds. 24-7LAW offers several services that may help you. We can guide you on your potential options, assist you in managing your response and even refer you to a solicitor, if you so wish

Q. I could not see the speed camera or the policeman that may have caught me speeding; does this mean I cannot be prosecuted ?
Ans. No. Even if the speed camera or policeman is hidden from your view, you can still be prosecuted

Q. I may have been caught speeding by a camera, but there were no police present, am I likely to be prosecuted ?
Ans. For the purposes of a speeding conviction, there is no requirement for the police to be present if a camera records you driving in excess of the speed limit

Q. I may have been caught speeding by a police officer, but the officer was alone, am I likely to be prosecuted ?
Ans. If the police officer was using a speed camera which showed that you were driving above the speed limit then there is no requirement for an additional police officer to be present. If the officer was not using a speed camera or other recording equipment an additional police officer needs to be present to corroborate that you were driving above the speed limit before you can be prosecuted.

Q. A police officer stopped me for speeding, how long do I have to wait before they prosecute me ?
Ans. If you have been stopped by a police officer, then they have 6 months to bring the case against you to court. It is likely that you can challenge the allegation if the police do not present your case to the court within this time. 24-7LAW offers several services that may help you. We can guide you on your potential options, assist you in managing your response and even refer you to a solicitor, if you so wish.

Q. A police officer has stopped me for speeding. Do I have to say anything ?
Ans. Yes, you are required to identify yourself to the officer and confirm to whom the vehicle belongs. You are not obliged to say anything further, although you will be informed at the time that if you do not say anything, it may harm your defence should you fail to raise anything that you may seek to rely upon at a later date.

Subject: I have just received a Notice of Intended Prosecution

Q. What is a Notice of Intended Prosecution?
Ans. You will receive a Notice of Intended Prosecution if the police believe that your vehicle was involved in an offence and the driver was not stopped at the time. This letter should tell you the details surrounding the alleged offence, including your vehicle details, date, time and location of the alleged speeding offence as well as the legal speed limit for the road in question. The notice means that the police are considering whether to commence criminal proceedings against the driver of the vehicle.

Q. I have just received a Notice of Intended Prosecution, what do I do now?
Ans. You need to provide the details of the driver of the vehicle within 28 days. If you do not return this information within 28 days you may commit an offence of failure to furnish information.

Q. Can I be convicted if I was not driving at the time of the alleged speeding offence?
Ans. No. However, you can be convicted of an offence for failure to furnish information if you do not provide the authorities with the details of who was driving at the time.

Q. Do I have to disclose who was driving at the time of the alleged offence?
Ans. Yes. Failure to disclose who was driving is a criminal offence.

Q. I have received a Notice of Intended Prosecution but I do not know who the driver is, what should I do?
Ans. The court can amend minor errors on the Notice of Intent to Prosecute, such as your name or address if they are small mistakes. However, if there is a large error the Notice of Intent to Prosecute may be invalid. contact one of our team who can assist you with this. 24-7LAW offers several services that may help you. We can guide you on your potential options, assist you in managing your response and even refer you to a solicitor, if you so wish.

Q. How long do I have to respond to the Notice of Intent to Prosecute? What happens if I do not respond?
Ans. You must respond within 28 days. If you do not return this information within 28 days you may commit an offence of failure to furnish information.

Q. I have just received a Notice of Intend to Prosecute. Will I have to go to court?
Ans. Not necessarily. Depending on the seriousness of the allegation you may be offered a Fixed Penalty Notice, Speed Awareness Course or the option to plead guilty by post. If you wish to challenge the allegation it is likely that you will need to defend your case in court. 24-7LAW offers several services that may help you. We can guide you on your potential options, assist you in managing your response and even refer you to a solicitor, if you so wish.

Q. I have just received a Notice of Intended Prosecution, do I need a lawyer?
Ans. Not necessarily. If the Notice of Intended Prosecution alleges a more serious offence or if you have previous motoring convictions it is advisable to contact a lawyer. If you have never committed a motoring offence before, if the offence alleged in the Notice of Intended Prosecution is less serious and you do not want to challenge the facts alleged you may not need a lawyer.

Q. I have just received a Notice of Intended Prosecution, what documents do I need to return?
Ans. Unless the Notice of Intended Prosecution requests otherwise, you do not need to send any money or your driving licence at this point. All you need to do is complete the form with your details and confirming the identity of the driver of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offence.

Q. I have completed and returned the Notice of Intended Prosecution, what happens now?
Ans. Usually, for a minor speeding offence you will receive a Fixed Penalty Notice which offers you the opportunity to accept a fine of £60 and three penalty points on your licence. You can reject this Fixed Penalty Notice and challenge the offence in the Magistrates’ Court. If your speed was excessive (over 40% of the speed limit) you may receive a summons to attend the Magistrates’ Court.

Q. To where should I return my completed Notice of Intended Prosecution form?
Ans. Your completed document should be returned to the local authority dealing with alleged motoring offences. The Notice of Intended Prosecution should state where to return the forms.

Subject: Speed Awareness Course

Q. What is a Speed Awareness Course?
Ans. Sometimes a driver may be offered the chance to attend a Speed Awareness Course instead of accepting the Fixed Penalty Notice. The titles and content of these courses varies regionally. They are courses held in local centres designed to educate the driver about the dangers of speeding and to encourage the driver not to commit a motoring offence again.

Q. Should I attend a Speed Awareness Course?
Ans. This depends upon your personal situation. If you accept a Speed Awareness Course you will not face further prosecution or receive penalty points or a fine for the alleged offence.

Q. I have not been offered a Speed Awareness Course; can I request it instead of my Fixed Penalty Notice?
Ans. No. Local authorities run Speed Awareness Courses for offences of different seriousness and you will be notified if you are eligible to attend instead of receiving a Fixed Penalty Notice.

Q. To where should I return my completed offer of Speed Awareness Course acceptance form?
Ans. Your response should be sent to your local authority which deals with these motoring offences. The Speeding Awareness Course offer letter should state where to return your response.

Q. Do I need to tell my insurance company that I have attended a Speed Awareness Course?
Ans. It varies between insurance companies. Read your insurance documents carefully to see if you are required to disclose this. It is most likely that you may be so required. If you are unsure contact one of our team who can assist you. 24-7LAW offers several services that may help you. We can guide you on your potential options, assist you in managing your response and even refer you to a solicitor, if you so wish.

Q. Do I need to tell my employer that I have attended a speed awareness course?
Ans. It depends upon your contract of employment and the work that you undertake. Read your contract of employment carefully and if you are unsure contact one of our team who will be able to assist you. 24-7LAW offers several services that may help you. We can guide you on your potential options, assist you in managing your response and even refer you to a solicitor, if you so wish.

Speeding penalties
The minimum penalty for speeding is a £100 fine and 3 penalty points added to your licence.

You could be disqualified from driving if you build up 12 or more penalty points within a period of 3 years - check your driving licence record to see if you have points on your licence.

If you’re caught by a speed camera
Within 14 days of your car being caught speeding you’ll be sent a:
- Notice of Intended Prosecution (NIP)
- Section 172 notice

You must return the Section 172 notice within 28 days, telling the police who was driving the car.

"You may have to go to court if you ignore the notice."

After you’ve sent the Section 172 notice back, you’ll be sent either a:
- Fixed Penalty Notice (FPN)
- letter telling you to go to court

If you’re stopped by the police, they can:
- give you a verbal warning
- give or send you an FPN
- order you to go to court - you’ll be sent a letter telling you what to do

Getting a Fixed Penalty Notice
If you get an FPN you can choose to plead guilty or not guilty.

If you plead guilty
You’ll have to pay a £100 fine and have 3 points added to your licence, unless you’re given the option to attend a speed awareness course.

If you pay the fine, how you pay depends on where you were caught speeding. You can:
- pay the fine online in England and Wales or check the ticket for other ways to pay
- find out how to pay the fine in Scotland
- contact the Laganside Courts Complex to pay the fine in Northern Ireland

Your driving licence will have a code on it for 4 years.

You may be given the option of attending a speed awareness course if:
- the police decide it’s appropriate for your offence
- you have not been on a speed awareness course in the past 3 years

If you plead not guilty
You’ll have to go to court if you plead not guilty.
You can be fined more and get more penalty points if the court decides you’re guilty of speeding.
The amount you’re fined depends on what the speed limit was and how much over it you were driving. It’s usually a percentage of your weekly income, up to a maximum of £1,000 (£2,500 if you were driving on a motorway).
You could also be disqualified from driving or have your licence suspended.

New drivers
If you’re still within 2 years of passing your driving test, your driving licence will be revoked (withdrawn) if you build up 6 or more penalty points.

Penalty points (endorsements)

The courts can fine you and ‘endorse’ your driving record with penalty points if you’re convicted of a motoring offence.
Endorsements must stay on your driving record for 4 or 11 years, depending on the offence.


Endorsement codes and penalty points
Each endorsement has a special code and is given ‘penalty points’ on a scale from 1 to 11. You get more points for more serious offences.
The table shows the offence codes that can be put on your driving record. It also shows how many penalty points you can get for them. Some offences may also involve a disqualification.
Offence codes and penalty points must stay on your driving record for 4 or 11 years depending on the offence.


Accident offences
These codes must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.

Code	Offence	Penalty points
AC10	Failing to stop after an accident	5 to 10
AC20	Failing to give particulars or report an accident within 24 hours	5 to 10
AC30	Undefined accident offences	4 to 9


Disqualified driver
Codes BA10 and BA30 must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.

Code	Offence	Penalty points
BA10	Driving while disqualified by order of court	6
BA30	Attempting to drive while disqualified by order of court
BA40	Causing death by driving while disqualified	3 to 11
BA60	Causing serious injury by driving while disqualified	3 to 11
Codes BA40 and BA60 must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the conviction.

Careless driving
Code	Offence	Penalty points
CD10	Driving without due care and attention	3 to 9
CD20	Driving without reasonable consideration for other road users	3 to 9
CD30	Driving without due care and attention or without reasonable consideration for other road users	3 to 9
CD33	Causing serious injury by careless or inconsiderate driving	3 to 9
CD40	Causing death through careless driving when unfit through drink	3 to 11
CD50	Causing death by careless driving when unfit through drugs	3 to 11
CD60	Causing death by careless driving with alcohol level above the limit	3 to 11
CD70	Causing death by careless driving then failing to supply a specimen for alcohol analysis
CD80	Causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving	3 to 11
CD90	Causing death by driving: unlicensed, disqualified or uninsured drivers
Codes CD10 to CD33 must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.
Codes CD40 to CD70 must stay on a driving record for 11 years from the date of the conviction.
Codes CD80 and CD90 must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the conviction.


Construction and use offences
These codes must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.
Code	Offence	Penalty points
CU10	Using a vehicle with defective brakes	3
CU20	Causing or likely to cause danger by reason of use of unsuitable vehicle or using a vehicle with parts or accessories (excluding brakes, steering or tyres) in a dangerous condition	3
CU30	Using a vehicle with defective tyre(s)	3
CU40	Using a vehicle with defective steering	3
CU50	Causing or likely to cause danger by reason of load or passengers	3
CU80	Breach of requirements as to control of the vehicle, such as using a mobile phone	3 to 6


Reckless/dangerous driving
These codes must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the conviction.
Code	Offence	Penalty points
DD10	Causing serious injury by dangerous driving	3 to 11
DD40	Dangerous driving	3 to 11
DD60	Manslaughter or culpable homicide while driving a vehicle	3 to 11
DD80	Causing death by dangerous driving	3 to 11
DD90	Furious driving	3 to 9


Drink
Codes DR10 to DR61 must stay on a driving record for 11 years from the date of the conviction.
Codes DR40 to DR70 must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence or 4 years from date of conviction where a disqualification is imposed
Code	Offence	Penalty points
DR10	Driving or attempting to drive with alcohol level above limit	3 to 11
DR20	Driving or attempting to drive while unfit through drink	3 to 11
DR30	Driving or attempting to drive then failing to supply a specimen for analysis	3 to 11
DR31	Driving or attempting to drive then refusing to give permission for analysis of a blood sample that was taken without consent due to incapacity	3 to 11
DR61	Refusing to give permission for analysis of a blood sample that was taken without consent due to incapacity in circumstances other than driving or attempting to drive	10
DR40	In charge of a vehicle while alcohol level above limit	10
DR50	In charge of a vehicle while unfit through drink	10
DR60	Failure to provide a specimen for analysis in circumstances other than driving or attempting to drive	10
DR70	Failing to co-operate with a preliminary test	4

Drugs
These codes must stay on a driving record for 11 years from the date of the conviction.

Code	Offence	Penalty points
DG10	Driving or attempting to drive with drug level above the specified limit	3 to 11
DG60	Causing death by careless driving with drug level above the limit	3 to 11
DR80	Driving or attempting to drive when unfit through drugs	3 to 11
These codes must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence or 4 years from date of conviction where a disqualification is imposed.
Code	Offence	Penalty points
DG40	In charge of a vehicle while drug level above specified limit	10
DR70	Failing to co-operate with a preliminary test	4
DR90	In charge of a vehicle when unfit through drugs	10

Insurance offences
Code IN10 must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.
Code	Offence	Penalty points
IN10	Using a vehicle uninsured against third party risks	6 to 8


Licence offences
These codes must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.
Code	Offence	Penalty points
LC20	Driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence	3 to 6
LC30	Driving after making a false declaration about fitness when applying for a licence	3 to 6
LC40	Driving a vehicle having failed to notify a disability	3 to 6
LC50	Driving after a licence has been cancelled (revoked) or refused on medical grounds	3 to 6


Miscellaneous offences
These codes must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.

Code	Offence	Penalty points
MS10	Leaving a vehicle in a dangerous position	3
MS20	Unlawful pillion riding	3
MS30	Play street offences	2
MS50	Motor racing on the highway	3 to 11
MS60	Offences not covered by other codes (including offences relating to breach of requirements as to control of vehicle)	3
MS70	Driving with uncorrected defective eyesight	3
MS80	Refusing to submit to an eyesight test	3
MS90	Failure to give information as to identity of driver etc	6
Motorway offences
Code MW10 must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.

Code	Offence	Penalty points
MW10	Contravention of special roads regulations (excluding speed limits)	3
Pedestrian crossings
These codes must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.

Code	Offence	Penalty points
PC10	Undefined contravention of pedestrian crossing regulations	3
PC20	Contravention of pedestrian crossing regulations with moving vehicle	3
PC30	Contravention of pedestrian crossing regulations with stationary vehicle	3
Speed limits
These codes must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.

Code	Offence	Penalty points
SP10	Exceeding goods vehicle speed limits	3 to 6
SP20	Exceeding speed limit for type of vehicle (excluding goods or passenger vehicles)	3 to 6
SP30	Exceeding statutory speed limit on a public road	3 to 6
SP40	Exceeding passenger vehicle speed limit	3 to 6
SP50	Exceeding speed limit on a motorway	3 to 6
Traffic direction and signs
These codes must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.

Code	Offence	Penalty points
TS10	Failing to comply with traffic light signals	3
TS20	Failing to comply with double white lines	3
TS30	Failing to comply with ‘stop’ sign	3
TS40	Failing to comply with direction of a constable/warden	3
TS50	Failing to comply with traffic sign (excluding ‘stop’ signs, traffic lights or double white lines)	3
TS60	Failing to comply with a school crossing patrol sign	3
TS70	Undefined failure to comply with a traffic direction sign	3
Special code
Code TT99 must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of conviction.

It shows disqualification under ‘totting-up’ - if the total of penalty points reaches 12 or more within 3 years, the driver can be disqualified.

Theft or unauthorised taking
Code UT50 must stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of the offence.

Code	Offence	Penalty points
UT50	Aggravated taking of a vehicle	3 to 11
‘Mutual recognition’ codes
You’ll get an ‘MR’ code on your driving record if you’re disqualified while driving in Northern Ireland or the Isle of Man. Your disqualification period will also be valid in GB and will stay on your record for 4 years from the date of conviction.

Code	Offence
MR09	Reckless or dangerous driving (whether or not resulting in death, injury or serious risk)
MR19	Wilful failure to carry out the obligation placed on driver after being involved in a road accident (hit or run)
MR29	Driving a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or other substance affecting or diminishing the mental and physical abilities of a driver
MR39	Driving a vehicle faster than the permitted speed
MR49	Driving a vehicle whilst disqualified
MR59	Other conduct constituting an offence for which a driving disqualification has been imposed by the State of Offence
Aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring offences
For these offences, the codes are similar, but with the number 0 on the code changed to 2.

For example, code LC20 (driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence) becomes code LC22 on your driving record if you have helped someone to do this.

Causing or permitting offences
For these offences, the codes are similar, but with the number 0 on the code changed to 4.

For example, LC20 (driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence) becomes LC24 on your licence if you’ve caused or permitted someone to do this.

Inciting offences
For these offences, the codes are similar, but with the number 0 on the code changed to 6.

For example, DD40 (dangerous driving) becomes DD46 on your driving record if you’ve incited someone to do this.


How long endorsements stay on your driving record
Endorsements stay on your driving record for 4 or 11 years depending on the offence. This can start from either the date you’re convicted or the date of your offence.

The endorsement is ‘valid’ for the first:

3 years, for a 4-year endorsement
10 years, for an 11-year endorsement
A court can take your endorsement into account if both:

you commit another offence while it’s valid
the endorsement is still on your driving record when the court considers your case
Other people, like insurers and employers, may be able to find out that you have the endorsement:

any time during a 4-year endorsement
during the first 5 years of an 11-year endorsement, or the first 30 months if you’re under 18
4 years from date of conviction
An endorsement will stay on a driving record for 4 years from the date of conviction if the offence:

is for reckless/dangerous driving - shown on the driving record as DD40, DD60 and DD80
results in disqualification
Example

Date of conviction 28 May 2011 - the endorsement must stay on the driving record until 28 May 2015.

4 years from the date of offence
In all other cases endorsements stay on your driving record for 4 years from the date of offence.

Example

Date of offence 10 June 2012 - the endorsement must stay on the driving record until 10 June 2016.

11 years from date of conviction
If the offence is:

drink driving or drug driving - shown on the driving record as DR10, DR20, DR30, DR31, DR61 and DR80
causing death by careless driving while under the influence of drink or drugs – shown on the driving record as CD40, CD50 and CD60
causing death by careless driving, then failing to provide a specimen for analysis – shown on the driving record as CD70
Example

Date of conviction 3 December 2009 - the endorsement must stay on the driving record until 3 December 2020.

Returning your driving licence for endorsement
If you get a fixed penalty notice for a motoring offence, you do not need to give your driving licence to the police or fixed penalty office (FPO).

To accept the fixed penalty you need to give them your:

name
date of birth
driving licence number
The FPO will tell the DVLA about the endorsement (including penalty points) so they can add it to your record.

You may be asked to hand your licence in at court. The court will then send it to DVLA. If you do not hand it in, then you may be asked to send it to DVLA.

When you must send your licence to DVLA
DVLA will write to you asking you to send your licence to them if:

you’re a new driver, who has been given 6 or more penalty points within 2 years of passing your test, and DVLA has revoked your licence
you have been disqualified from driving by the court and you did not hand your licence in to the court
the licence you gave the court is invalid
you’ve let DVLA know that you’ve changed your address
You must send your driving licence to DVLA when asked. If you do not, you could be fined up to £1000.

Removing expired endorsements from your driving record
Most expired endorsements will automatically be removed from your driving record when they’re no longer valid.

The length of time they stay on your record depends on how serious the offence was.


How to check your endorsement details
View your driving licence record to see what penalty points you have and when they’ll be removed.
https://www.gov.uk/view-driving-licence

You can also contact DVLA. https://www.gov.uk/contact-the-dvla/y/driver-licensing

Incorrect endorsement details on your licence
Contact the court that convicted if your endorsement details are shown incorrectly on your driving licence.

legislation.gov.uk


Speeding
17Penalty points
In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), in column (7) (penalty points)—
(a)for the entry relating to section 17(4) of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (c. 27) (traffic regulation on special roads), substitute “ 2-6 or appropriate penalty points (fixed penalty) if committed in respect of a speed limit, 3 in any other case ”, and
(b)for the entry relating to section 89(1) of that Act (speeding offences other than those on special roads), substitute “ 2-6 or appropriate penalty points (fixed penalty) ”.
18Speed assessment equipment detection devices
(1)In section 41 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (regulation of construction, weight, equipment and use of vehicles)—
(a)in subsection (2), at the end insert—
“(m)speed assessment equipment detection devices.”, and
(b)in subsection (7), at the end insert—““speed assessment equipment detection device” means a device the purpose, or one of the purposes, of which is to detect, or interfere with the operation of, equipment used to assess the speed of motor vehicles.”
(2)After section 41B of that Act (breach of requirement as to weight: goods and passenger vehicles) insert—
“41CBreach of requirement as to speed assessment equipment detection devices
A person who—
(a)contravenes or fails to comply with a construction or use requirement as to speed assessment equipment detection devices, or
(b)uses on a road a motor vehicle or trailer which does not comply with such a requirement, or causes or permits a motor vehicle or trailer to be so used,is guilty of an offence.”
(3)In section 42(a) of that Act (breach of other construction and use requirements), for “or 41B(1)(a)” substitute “ , 41B(1)(a), 41C(a) ”.
(4)In section 98(1) of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (interpretation), at the appropriate place insert—““special road” in England and Wales has the same meaning as in the Highways Act 1980 and in Scotland has the same meaning as in the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984,”.
(5)In Schedule 1 to that Act (offences to which certain sections apply), after the entry relating to section 41B of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) insert—
“RTA section 41C	Breach of requirement as to speed assessment equipment detection device.	Sections 11 and 12(1) of this Act.”
(6)In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to that Act (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), after the entry relating to section 41B of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“RTA section 41C	Breach of requirement as to speed assessment equipment detection devices.	Summarily.	
(a) Level 4 on the standard scale if committed on a special road.

(b) Level 3 on the standard scale in any other case.

Discretionary.	Obligatory.	3-6 or 3 (fixed penalty).”
(7)In Schedule 3 to that Act (fixed penalty offences), after the entry relating to section 41B of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“RTA section 41C	Breach of requirement as to speed assessment equipment detection devices.”
19Exemptions from speed limits
For section 87 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (c. 27) (exemption of fire, ambulance and police vehicles from speed limits) substitute—
“87Exemptions from speed limits
(1)No statutory provision imposing a speed limit on motor vehicles shall apply to any vehicle on an occasion when—
(a)it is being used for fire and rescue authority purposes or for or in connection with the exercise of any function of a relevant authority as defined in section 6 of the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005, for ambulance purposes or for police or Serious Organised Crime Agency purposes,
(b)it is being used for other prescribed purposes in such circumstances as may be prescribed, or
(c)it is being used for training persons to drive vehicles for use for any of the purposes mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) above,if the observance of that provision would be likely to hinder the use of the vehicle for the purpose for which it is being used on that occasion.
(2)Subsection (1) above does not apply unless the vehicle is being driven by a person who—
(a)has satisfactorily completed a course of training in the driving of vehicles at high speed provided in accordance with regulations under this section, or
(b)is driving the vehicle as part of such a course.
(3)The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision about courses of training in the driving of vehicles at high speed.
(4)The regulations may include—
(a)provision about the nature of courses,
(b)provision for the approval by the Secretary of State of persons providing courses or giving instruction on courses and the withdrawal of approvals (including provision for appeals against refusal and withdrawal of approvals),
(c)provision specifying the maximum fees that a person may be required to pay for a course,
(d)provision for the training or assessment, or the supervision of the training or assessment, of persons providing courses or giving instruction on courses,
(e)provision for the evidencing of the successful completion of courses,
(f)provision authorising the Secretary of State to make available information about persons providing courses or giving instruction on courses, and
(g)provision treating courses of training in the driving of vehicles at high speed which have been completed before the coming into force of the regulations as if they had been provided in accordance with the regulations.
(5)The regulations may include provision for the charging of reasonable fees in respect of any function conferred or imposed on the Secretary of State by the regulations.
(6)The regulations may make different provision—
(a)for different classes of vehicle,
(b)for different descriptions of persons, or
(c)otherwise for different circumstances.”


New offences
20Causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving
(1)In the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52), after section 2A insert—
“2BCausing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving
A person who causes the death of another person by driving a mechanically propelled vehicle on a road or other public place without due care and attention, or without reasonable consideration for other persons using the road or place, is guilty of an offence.”
(2)In section 24(1) of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (alternative verdicts), in the Table—
(a)in the entry relating to section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (causing death by dangerous driving), in the second column, after “Section 2 (dangerous driving)” insert “ Section 2B (causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving) ”,
(b)after the entry relating to section 2 of that Act insert—
“Section 2B (causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving)	Section 3 (careless, and inconsiderate, driving),”
(c)in the entry relating to section 3A of that Act (causing death by careless driving when under influence of drink or drugs), in the second column, before “Section 3 (careless, and inconsiderate, driving)” insert “ Section 2B (causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving) ”.
(3)In Schedule 1 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (offences to which certain sections apply), after the entry relating to section 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“RTA section 2B	Causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving.	Sections 11 and 12(1) of this Act.”
(4)In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to that Act (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), after the entry relating to section 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“RTA section 2B	Causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving.	(a) Summarily.	(a) 12 months (in England and Wales) or 6 months (in Scotland) or the statutory maximum or both.	Obligatory.	Obligatory.	3-11
 	 	(b) On indictment.	(b) 5 years or a fine or both.	 	 	 ”
(5)In sections 16(1)(a)(ii) and 17(1)(b) and (2)(b) of the Coroners Act 1988 (c. 13) (informing coroners)—
(a)after “1” insert “ , 2B ”, and
(b)after “dangerous driving” insert “ , careless driving ”.
(6)In paragraph 3 of Schedule 3 to the Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (c. 32) (offences where notice must be given to authority of State in which offender is normally resident), after paragraph (b) insert—
“(ba)section 2B (causing death by careless, or inconsiderate, driving),”.
Commencement Information

I1	S. 20 in force at 18.8.2008 by S.I. 2008/1918, art. 2(a)

21Causing death by driving: unlicensed, disqualified or uninsured drivers
(1)In the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52), after section 3ZA (inserted by section 30) insert—
“3ZBCausing death by driving: unlicensed, disqualified or uninsured drivers
A person is guilty of an offence under this section if he causes the death of another person by driving a motor vehicle on a road and, at the time when he is driving, the circumstances are such that he is committing an offence under—
(a)section 87(1) of this Act (driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence),
(b)section 103(1)(b) of this Act (driving while disqualified), or
(c)section 143 of this Act (using motor vehicle while uninsured or unsecured against third party risks).”
(2)In Schedule 1 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (offences to which certain sections apply), after the entry relating to section 3 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“RTA section 3ZB	Causing death by driving: unlicensed, disqualified or uninsured drivers.	Sections 11 and 12(1) of this Act.”
(3)In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to that Act (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), after the entry relating to section 3 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“RTA section 3ZB	Causing death by driving: unlicensed, disqualified or uninsured drivers.	(a) Summarily.	(a) 12 months (in England and Wales) or 6 months (in Scotland) or the statutory maximum or both.	Obligatory.	Obligatory.	3-11
 	 	(b) On indictment.	(b) 2 years or a fine or both.	 	 	 ”
(4)In sections 16(1)(a)(ii) and 17(1)(b) and (2)(b) of the Coroners Act 1988 (c. 13) (informing coroners)—
(a)before “or 3A” insert “ , 3ZB ”, and
(b)before “or careless” insert “ , unlicensed, disqualified or uninsured drivers ”.
(5)In paragraph 3 of Schedule 3 to the Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (c. 32) (offences where notice must be given to authority of State in which offender is normally resident), after paragraph (c) insert—
“(ca)section 3ZB (causing death by driving: unlicensed, disqualified or uninsured drivers),”.
Commencement Information

I2	S. 21 in force at 18.8.2008 by S.I. 2008/1918, art. 2(b)

22Offence of keeping vehicle which does not meet insurance requirements
(1)In the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52), after section 144 insert—
“144AOffence of keeping vehicle which does not meet insurance requirements
(1)If a motor vehicle registered under the Vehicle Excise and Registration Act 1994 does not meet the insurance requirements, the person in whose name the vehicle is registered is guilty of an offence.
(2)For the purposes of this section a vehicle meets the insurance requirements if—
(a)it is covered by a such a policy of insurance or such a security in respect of third party risks as complies with the requirements of this Part of this Act, and
(b)either of the following conditions is satisfied.
(3)The first condition is that the policy or security, or the certificate of insurance or security which relates to it, identifies the vehicle by its registration mark as a vehicle which is covered by the policy or security.
(4)The second condition is that the vehicle is covered by the policy or security because—
(a)the policy or security covers any vehicle, or any vehicle of a particular description, the owner of which is a person named in the policy or security or in the certificate of insurance or security which relates to it, and
(b)the vehicle is owned by that person.
(5)For the purposes of this section a vehicle is covered by a policy of insurance or security if the policy of insurance or security is in force in relation to the use of the vehicle.
144BExceptions to section 144A offence
(1)A person (“the registered keeper”) in whose name a vehicle which does not meet the insurance requirements is registered at any particular time (“the relevant time”) does not commit an offence under section 144A of this Act at that time if any of the following conditions are satisfied.
(2)The first condition is that at the relevant time the vehicle is owned as described—
(a)in subsection (1) of section 144 of this Act, or
(b)in paragraph (a), (b), (da), (db), (dc) or (g) of subsection (2) of that section,(whether or not at the relevant time it is being driven as described in that provision).
(3)The second condition is that at the relevant time the vehicle is owned with the intention that it should be used as described in paragraph (c), (d), (e) or (f) of section 144(2) of this Act.
(4)The third condition is that the registered keeper—
(a)is not at the relevant time the person keeping the vehicle, and
(b)if previously he was the person keeping the vehicle, he has by the relevant time complied with any requirements under subsection (7)(a) below that he is required to have complied with by the relevant or any earlier time.
(5)The fourth condition is that—
(a)the registered keeper is at the relevant time the person keeping the vehicle,
(b)at the relevant time the vehicle is not used on a road or other public place, and
(c)the registered keeper has by the relevant time complied with any requirements under subsection (7)(a) below that he is required to have complied with by the relevant or any earlier time.
(6)The fifth condition is that—
(a)the vehicle has been stolen before the relevant time,
(b)the vehicle has not been recovered by the relevant time, and
(c)any requirements under subsection (7)(b) below that, in connection with the theft, are required to have been complied with by the relevant or any earlier time have been complied with by the relevant time.
(7)Regulations may make provision—
(a)for the purposes of subsection (4)(b) and (5)(c) above, requiring a person in whose name a vehicle is registered to furnish such particulars and make such declarations as may be prescribed, and to do so at such times and in such manner as may be prescribed, and
(b)for the purposes of subsection (6)(c) above, as to the persons to whom, the times at which and the manner in which the theft of a vehicle is to be notified.
(8)Regulations may make provision amending this section for the purpose of providing for further exceptions to section 144A of this Act (or varying or revoking any such further exceptions).
(9)A person accused of an offence under section 144A of this Act is not entitled to the benefit of an exception conferred by or under this section unless evidence is adduced that is sufficient to raise an issue with respect to that exception; but where evidence is so adduced it is for the prosecution to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the exception does not apply.
144CFixed penalty notices
(1)Where on any occasion the Secretary of State has reason to believe that a person has committed an offence under section 144A of this Act, the Secretary of State may give the person a notice offering him the opportunity of discharging any liability to conviction for that offence by payment of a fixed penalty to the Secretary of State.
(2)Where a person is given a notice under this section in respect of an offence under section 144A of this Act—
(a)no proceedings may be instituted for that offence before the end of the period of 21 days following the date of the notice, and
(b)he may not be convicted of that offence if he pays the fixed penalty before the end of that period.
(3)A notice under this section must give such particulars of the circumstances alleged to constitute the offence as are necessary for giving reasonable information of the offence.
(4)A notice under this section must also state—
(a)the period during which, by virtue of subsection (2) above, proceedings will not be taken for the offence,
(b)the amount of the fixed penalty, and
(c)the person to whom and the address at which the fixed penalty may be paid.
(5)Without prejudice to payment by any other method, payment of the fixed penalty may be made by pre-paying and posting a letter containing the amount of the penalty (in cash or otherwise) to the person mentioned in subsection (4)(c) above at the address so mentioned.
(6)Where a letter is sent in accordance with subsection (5) above payment is to be regarded as having been made at the time at which that letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.
(7)Regulations may make provision as to any matter incidental to the operation of this section, and in particular—
(a)as to the form of a notice under this section,
(b)as to the information to be provided in such a notice by virtue of this section, and
(c)as to any further information to be provided in a such notice.
(8)The fixed penalty payable under this section is, subject to subsection (9) below, £100.
(9)Regulations may substitute a different amount for the amount for the time being specified in subsection (8) above.
(10)Regulations may make provision for treating a fixed penalty payable under this section as having been paid if a lesser amount is paid before the end of a prescribed period.
(11)In any proceedings a certificate which—
(a)purports to be signed by or on behalf of the Secretary of State, and
(b)states that payment of a fixed penalty was or was not received by a date specified in the certificate,is evidence of the facts stated.
144DSection 144A offence: supplementary
(1)Schedule 2A makes provision about the immobilisation of vehicles as regards which it appears that an offence under section 144A of this Act is being committed and about their removal and disposal.
(2)A person authorised by the Secretary of State for the purposes of this subsection may on behalf of the Secretary of State conduct and appear in any proceedings by or against the Secretary of State in connection with the enforcement of an offence under section 144A of this Act or under regulations made under section 160 of this Act by virtue of Schedule 2A to this Act—
(a)in England and Wales, in a magistrates' court, and
(b)in Scotland, in any court other than the High Court of Justiciary or the Court of Session.”
(2)Before section 160 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) insert—
“159ADisclosure of information
(1)Regulations may make provision for and in connection with requiring MIIC to make information available to any prescribed person for the purposes of the exercise of any of that person's functions in connection with the enforcement of an offence under this Part of this Act or under regulations made under section 160 of this Act.
(2)In this section—
“MIIC” means the Motor Insurers' Information Centre (a company limited by guarantee and incorporated under the Companies Act 1985 on 8th December 1998), and
“information” means information held in any form.”
(3)After Schedule 2 to that Act insert the Schedule 2A set out in Schedule 5 to this Act.
(4)In section 91(a) of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (penalty for breach of regulations: application to regulations under Road Traffic Act 1988), after “132” insert “ or under section 160 by virtue of Schedule 2A ”.
(5)In Schedule 1 to that Act (offences to which certain sections apply), after the entry relating to section 143 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“RTA section 144A	Keeping vehicle which does not meet insurance requirements.	Sections 6, 11 and 12(1) of this Act.”
(6)Part 1 of Schedule 2 to that Act (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts) is amended as follows.
(7)After the entry relating to section 143 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“RTA section 144A	Keeping vehicle which does not meet insurance requirements.	Summarily.	Level 3 on the standard scale.	 	 	 ”
(8)After the entry relating to section 154 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“Regulations under RTA section 160 made by virtue of paragraph 2(1) of Schedule 2A	Contravention of provision of regulations (which is declared by regulations to be an offence) prohibiting removal of or interference with immobilisation notice.	Summarily.	Level 2 on the standard scale.	 	 	 
Regulations under RTA section 160 made by virtue of paragraph 2(2) of Schedule 2A	Contravention of provision of regulations (which is declared by regulations to be an offence) prohibiting removal or attempted removal of immobilisation device.	Summarily.	Level 3 on the standard scale.	 	 	 
Regulations under RTA section 160 made by virtue of paragraph 2(3) of Schedule 2A	Contravention of provision of regulations (which is declared by regulations to be an offence) about display of disabled person's badge.	Summarily.	Level 3 on the standard scale.	 	 	 
Regulations under RTA section 160 made by virtue of paragraph 2(4) of Schedule 2A	Contravention of provision of regulations (which is declared by regulations to be an offence) prohibiting making of false or misleading declaration to secure release of vehicle from immobilisation device.	
(a) Summarily.

(b) On indictment.

(a) The statutory maximum.

(b) 2 years or a fine or both.

 	 	 
Regulations under RTA section 160 made by virtue of paragraph 4 of Schedule 2A	Contravention of provision of regulations (which is declared by regulations to be an offence) prohibiting making of false or misleading declaration to secure possession of vehicle in person's custody.	
(a) Summarily.

(b) On indictment.

(a) The statutory maximum.

(b) 2 years or a fine or both.

 Increases in penalties
23Careless, and inconsiderate, driving
In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), in the entry relating to section 3 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (careless, and inconsiderate, driving), in column (4) (punishment), for “Level 4” substitute “ Level 5 ”.
Commencement Information

I1	S. 23 in force at 24.9.2007 by S.I. 2007/2472, art. 2(b)

24Breach of requirements relating to children and seat belts
In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), in the entry relating to section 15(4) of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (driving a motor vehicle in contravention of requirements relating to seat belts where children in rear seat), in column (4) (punishment), for “Level 1” substitute “ Level 2 ”.
Commencement Information

I2	S. 24 in force at 24.9.2007 by S.I. 2007/2472, art. 2(c)

25Using vehicle in dangerous condition etc.
(1)In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), in the entry relating to section 40A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (using vehicle in dangerous condition etc.), in column (5) (disqualification), for “Discretionary.” substitute—
“(a) Obligatory if committed within three years of a previous conviction of the offender under section 40A.

(b) Discretionary in any other case.”

(2)In section 34 of that Act (disqualification for certain offences), after subsection (4A) insert—
“(4B)Where a person convicted of an offence under section 40A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (using vehicle in dangerous condition etc.) has within the three years immediately preceding the commission of the offence been convicted of any such offence, subsection (1) above shall apply in relation to him as if the reference to twelve months were a reference to six months.”
Commencement Information

I3	S. 25 in force at 24.9.2007 by S.I. 2007/2472, art. 2(d)

26Breach of requirements as to control of vehicle, mobile telephones etc.
(1)Before section 42 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“41DBreach of requirements as to control of vehicle, mobile telephones etc.
A person who contravenes or fails to comply with a construction and use requirement—
(a)as to not driving a motor vehicle in a position which does not give proper control or a full view of the road and traffic ahead, or not causing or permitting the driving of a motor vehicle by another person in such a position, or
(b)as to not driving or supervising the driving of a motor vehicle while using a hand-held mobile telephone or other hand-held interactive communication device, or not causing or permitting the driving of a motor vehicle by another person using such a telephone or other device,is guilty of an offence.”
(2)In section 42(a) of that Act (breach of other construction and use requirements), before “of” insert “ or 41D ”.
(3)In Schedule 1 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (offences to which certain sections apply), before the entry relating to section 42 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“RTA section 41D.	Breach of requirements as to control of vehicle, mobile telephones etc.	Sections 11 and 12(1) of this Act.”
(4)In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to that Act (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), before the entry relating to section 42 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) insert—
“RTA section 41D	Breach of requirements as to control of vehicle, mobile telephones etc.	Summarily.	
(a) Level 4 on the standard scale if committed in respect of a goods vehicle or a vehicle adapted to carry more than eight passengers.

(b) Level 3 on the standard scale in any other case.

Discretionary.	Obligatory.	3.”
(5)In Schedule 3 to that Act (fixed penalty offences), before the entry relating to section 42 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 insert—
“RTA section 41D	Breach of requirement as to control of vehicle, mobile telephone etc.”
Commencement Information

I4	S. 26 in force at 27.2.2007 by S.I. 2007/237, art. 2(a)

27Power of police to stop vehicle
In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), in the entry relating to section 163 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (failing to stop mechanically propelled vehicle or cycle when required to do so), in column (4) (punishment), for “Level 3 on the standard scale.” substitute—
“(a) Level 5 on the standard scale if committed by a person driving a mechanically propelled vehicle.

(b) Level 3 on the standard scale if committed by a person riding a cycle.”and, in column (2) (general nature of offence), for “motor” substitute “ mechanically propelled ”.

Commencement Information

I5	S. 27 in force at 24.9.2007 by S.I. 2007/2472, art. 2(e)

28Furious driving
In Part 2 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences otherwise than under the Traffic Acts), after the entry relating to manslaughter and culpable homicide insert—
“An offence under section 35 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 (furious driving).	Discretionary.	Obligatory if committed in respect of a mechanically propelled vehicle.	3-9”
Commencement Information

I6	S. 28 in force at 24.9.2007 by S.I. 2007/2472, art. 2(f)

29Breach of duty to give information as to identity of driver etc.
In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), in the entry relating to section 172 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (duty to give information as to identity of driver etc. in certain circumstances), in column (7) (penalty points), for “3” substitute “ 6 ”.

Other provisions about offences
30Meaning of driving without due care and attention
In the Road Traffic Act 1988, after section 3 insert—
“3ZAMeaning of careless, or inconsiderate, driving
(1)This section has effect for the purposes of sections 2B and 3 above and section 3A below.
(2)A person is to be regarded as driving without due care and attention if (and only if) the way he drives falls below what would be expected of a competent and careful driver.
(3)In determining for the purposes of subsection (2) above what would be expected of a careful and competent driver in a particular case, regard shall be had not only to the circumstances of which he could be expected to be aware but also to any circumstances shown to have been within the knowledge of the accused.
(4)A person is to be regarded as driving without reasonable consideration for other persons only if those persons are inconvenienced by his driving.”
Commencement Information

I1	S. 30 in force at 24.9.2007 for specified purposes by S.I. 2007/2472, art. 2(h)

I2	S. 30 in force at 18.8.2008 in so far as not already in force by S.I. 2008/1918, art. 2(c)

31Extension of offence in section 3A of Road Traffic Act 1988
(1)Section 3A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing death by careless driving when under influence of drink or drugs etc.) is amended as follows.
(2)In subsection (1), after paragraph (c) insert “or
(d)he is required by a constable to give his permission for a laboratory test of a specimen of blood taken from him under section 7A of this Act, but without reasonable excuse fails to do so,”.
(3)In subsection (3), for “and (c)” substitute “ , (c) and (d) ”.
(4)In section 24(1) of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (alternative verdicts), in the Table, in the entry relating to section 3A of the Road Traffic Act 1988, in the second column, after “Section 7(6) (failing to provide specimen)” insert “ Section 7A(6) (failing to give permission for laboratory test) ”.
Commencement Information

I3	S. 31 in force at 24.9.2007 by S.I. 2007/2472, art. 2(i)

32Alternative verdict on unsuccessful culpable homicide prosecution
(1)Section 23 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (alternative verdicts in Scotland) is amended as follows.
(2)In subsection (1), for “an offence under section 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (dangerous driving)” substitute “ any of the relevant offences ”.
(3)After that subsection insert—
“(1A)For the purposes of subsection (1) above the following are the relevant offences—
(a)an offence under section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing death by dangerous driving),
(b)an offence under section 2 of that Act (dangerous driving), and
(c)an offence under section 3A of that Act (causing death by careless driving when under influence of drink or drugs).”
Commencement Information

I4	S. 32 in force at 24.9.2007 by S.I. 2007/2472, art. 2(j)

33Alternative verdict on unsuccessful manslaughter prosecution
In section 24 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (alternative verdicts), before subsection (1) insert—
“(A1)Where—
(a)a person charged with manslaughter in connection with the driving of a mechanically propelled vehicle by him is found not guilty of that offence, but
(b)the allegations in the indictment amount to or include an allegation of any of the relevant offences,he may be convicted of that offence.
(A2)For the purposes of subsection (A1) above the following are the relevant offences—
(a)an offence under section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing death by dangerous driving),
(b)an offence under section 2 of that Act (dangerous driving),
(c)an offence under section 3A of that Act (causing death by careless driving when under influence of drink or drugs), and
(d)an offence under section 35 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 (furious driving).”

Attendance on courses
Prospective

34Penalty points
(1)The Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 is amended as follows.
(2)In section 29 (penalty points to be taken into account on conviction), after subsection (2) insert—
“(2A)Subsection (1)(b) above has effect subject to section 30A(4) of this Act.”
(3)After section 30 insert—
“30AReduced penalty points for attendance on course
(1)This section applies where—
(a)a person is convicted of a specified offence by or before a court,
(b)penalty points are to be attributed to the offence and the court does not order him to be disqualified, and
(c)at least seven but no more than eleven penalty points are to be taken into account on the occasion of the conviction.
(2)In this section “specified offence” means—
(a)an offence under section 3 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (careless, and inconsiderate, driving),
(b)an offence under section 36 of that Act (failing to comply with traffic signs),
(c)an offence under section 17(4) of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (use of special road contrary to scheme or regulations), or
(d)an offence under section 89(1) of that Act (exceeding speed limit).
(3)But the Secretary of State may by regulations amend subsection (2) above by adding other offences or removing offences.
(4)Where this section applies, the court may make an order that three of the penalty points attributed to the offence (or all of them if three or fewer are so attributed) shall not be taken into account under section 29(1)(b) of this Act on the occasion of any conviction of an offence after the end of the period of twelve months beginning with the date of the order if, by the relevant date, the offender completes an approved course specified in the order.
(5)In subsection (4) above—
“an approved course” means a course approved by the appropriate national authority for the purposes of this section in relation to the description of offence of which the offender is convicted, and
“the relevant date” means such date, no later than ten months after the day on which the order is made, as is specified in the order.
(6)A court shall not make an order under this section in the case of an offender convicted of an offence if—
(a)the offender has, during the period of three years ending with the date on which the offence was committed, committed a specified offence and successfully completed an approved course pursuant to an order made under this section or section 34A of this Act on conviction of that offence, or
(b)the offence was committed during his probationary period.
(7)A court shall not make an order under this section in the case of an offender unless—
(a)the court is satisfied that a place on the course specified in the order will be available for the offender,
(b)the offender appears to the court to be of or over the age of 17,
(c)the court has informed the offender (orally or in writing and in ordinary language) of the effect of the order and of the amount of the fees which he is required to pay for the course and when he must pay them, and
(d)the offender has agreed that the order should be made.
30BCertificates of completion of courses
(1)An offender shall be regarded for the purposes of section 30A of this Act as having completed a course satisfactorily if (and only if) a certificate that he has done so is received by the proper officer of the supervising court.
(2)A course provider must give a certificate under subsection (1) above to the offender not later than fourteen days after the date specified in the order as the latest date for the completion of the course unless the offender—
(a)fails to make due payment of fees for the course,
(b)fails to attend the course in accordance with the course provider's reasonable instructions, or
(c)fails to comply with any other reasonable requirement of the course provider.
(3)A certificate under subsection (1) above is to be given by the course provider and shall be in such form, and contain such particulars, as may be prescribed by, or determined in accordance with, regulations made by the appropriate national authority.
(4)Where a course provider decides not to give a certificate under subsection (1) above to the offender, he shall give written notice of the decision to the offender as soon as possible, and in any event not later than fourteen days after the date specified in the order as the latest date for completion of the course.
(5)An offender to whom a notice is given under subsection (4) above may, within such period as may be prescribed by rules of court, apply to the supervising court, or (if the supervising court is not the Crown Court, the High Court of Justiciary or the relevant local court) to either the supervising court or the relevant local court, for a declaration that the course provider's decision not to give a certificate under subsection (1) above was contrary to subsection (2) above.
(6)If the court grants the application, section 30A of this Act shall have effect as if the certificate had been duly received by the proper officer of the supervising court.
(7)If fourteen days after the date specified in the order as the latest date for completion of the course the course provider has given neither the certificate under subsection (1) above nor a notice under subsection (4) above, the offender may, within such period as may be prescribed by rules of court, apply to the supervising court, or (if the supervising court is not the Crown Court, the High Court of Justiciary or the relevant local court) to either the supervising court or the relevant local court, for a declaration that the course provider is in default.
(8)If the court grants the application, section 30A of this Act shall have effect as if the certificate had been duly received by the proper officer of the supervising court.
(9)A notice under subsection (4) above shall specify the ground on which it is given; and the appropriate national authority may by regulations make provision as to the form of notices under that subsection and as to the circumstances in which they are to be treated as given.
(10)Where the proper office of a court receives a certificate under subsection (1) above, or a court grants an application under subsection (5) or (7) above, the proper officer or court must send notice of that fact to the Secretary of State; and the notice must be sent in such manner and to such address, and must contain such particulars, as the Secretary of State may determine.
30CApproval of courses
(1)If an application is made to the appropriate national authority for the approval of a course for the purposes of section 30A of this Act, the appropriate national authority must decide whether to grant or refuse the application.
(2)In reaching that decision the appropriate national authority must have regard to—
(a)the nature of the course, and
(b)whether the course provider is an appropriate person to provide the course and administer its provision efficiently and effectively,and may take into account any recommendations made by any persons appointed to consider the application.
(3)A course may be approved subject to conditions specified by the appropriate national authority.
(4)An approval of a course is for the period specified by the appropriate national authority (which must not exceed seven years), subject to withdrawal of approval.
(5)Regulations made by the appropriate national authority may make provision in relation to the approval of courses and may, in particular, include provision—
(a)in relation to the making of applications for approval,
(b)for the payment in respect of applications for approval, or of approvals, (or of both) of fees of such amounts as are prescribed by the regulations,
(c)specifying the maximum fees that a person may be required to pay for a course and by when they are to be paid,
(d)for the monitoring of courses and course providers,
(e)in relation to withdrawing approval,
(f)for an appeal to lie to the Transport Tribunal against a refusal of an application for approval, the imposition of conditions on the grant of such an application or the withdrawal of approval, and
(g)authorising the appropriate national authority to make available (with or without charge) information about courses and course providers.
30DProvisions supplementary to sections 30A to 30C
(1)The appropriate national authority may issue guidance to course providers, or to any category of course provider, as to the conduct of courses approved for the purposes of section 30A of this Act; and—
(a)course providers shall have regard to any guidance given to them under this subsection, and
(b)in determining for the purposes of section 30B of this Act whether any instructions or requirements of a course provider were reasonable, a court shall have regard to any guidance given to him under this subsection.
(2)The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision—
(a)amending section 30A(1)(c) of this Act by substituting for the lower number of penalty points for the time being specified there a different number of penalty points, or
(b)amending section 30A(6)(a) of this Act by substituting for the period for the time being specified there a different period.
(3)In sections 30A to 30C of this Act and this section—
“appropriate national authority” means (as respects Wales) the National Assembly for Wales and (otherwise) the Secretary of State;
“course provider”, in relation to a course, means the person by whom it is, or is to be, provided;
“probationary period” has the meaning given in section 1 of the Road Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995;
“proper officer” means—
(a)
in relation to a magistrates' court in England and Wales, the designated officer for the court, and

(b)
otherwise, the clerk of the court;

“relevant local court”, in relation to an order made under section 30A of this Act in the case of an offender, means—
(a)
in England and Wales, a magistrates' court acting for the local justice area in which the offender resides, and

(b)
in Scotland, the sheriff court for the district where the offender resides or, where the order is made by a stipendiary magistrate and the offender resides within his commission area, the district court for that area; and

“supervising court”, in relation to an order under section 30A of this Act, means—
(a)
in England and Wales, if the Crown Court made the order the Crown Court and otherwise a magistrates' court acting for the same local justice area as the court which made the order, and

(b)
in Scotland, the court which made the order.

(4)Any power to make regulations under section 30A, 30B or 30C of this Act or this section includes power to make different provision for different cases, and to make such incidental or supplementary provision as appears to the appropriate national authority to be necessary or appropriate.
(5)Any power to make regulations under section 30A, 30B or 30C of this Act or this section shall be exercisable by statutory instrument.
(6)No regulations shall be made under section 30A of this Act or this section unless a draft of the regulations has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
(7)A statutory instrument containing regulations made under section 30B or 30C of this Act by the Secretary of State shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”
35Reduced disqualification period for attendance on course
For sections 34A to 34C of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) substitute—
“34AReduced disqualification for attendance on courses
(1)This section applies where—
(a)a person is convicted of a relevant drink offence or a specified offence by or before a court, and
(b)the court makes an order under section 34 of this Act disqualifying him for a period of not less than twelve months.
(2)In this section “relevant drink offence” means—
(a)an offence under paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of section 3A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing death by careless driving when unfit to drive through drink) committed when unfit to drive through drink,
(b)an offence under paragraph (b) of that subsection (causing death by careless driving with excess alcohol),
(c)an offence under paragraph (c) of that subsection (failing to provide a specimen) where the specimen is required in connection with drink or consumption of alcohol,
(d)an offence under section 4 of that Act (driving or being in charge when under influence of drink) committed by reason of unfitness through drink,
(e)an offence under section 5(1) of that Act (driving or being in charge with excess alcohol),
(f)an offence under section 7(6) of that Act (failing to provide a specimen) committed in the course of an investigation into an offence within any of the preceding paragraphs, or
(g)an offence under section 7A(6) of that Act (failing to allow a specimen to be subjected to a laboratory test) in the course of an investigation into an offence within any of the preceding paragraphs.
(3)In this section “specified offence” means—
(a)an offence under section 3 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (careless, and inconsiderate, driving),
(b)an offence under section 36 of that Act (failing to comply with traffic signs),
(c)an offence under section 17(4) of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (use of special road contrary to scheme or regulations), or
(d)an offence under section 89(1) of that Act (exceeding speed limit).
(4)But the Secretary of State may by regulations amend subsection (3) above by adding other offences or removing offences.
(5)Where this section applies, the court may make an order that the period of disqualification imposed under section 34 of this Act (“the unreduced period”) shall be reduced if, by the relevant date, the offender satisfactorily completes an approved course specified in the order.
(6)In subsection (5) above—
“an approved course” means a course approved by the appropriate national authority for the purposes of this section in relation to the description of offence of which the offender is convicted, and
“the relevant date” means such date, at least two months before the last day of the period of disqualification as reduced by the order, as is specified in the order.
(7)The reduction made in a period of disqualification by an order under this section is a period specified in the order of—
(a)not less than three months, and
(b)not more than one quarter of the unreduced period,(and, accordingly, where the unreduced period is twelve months, the reduced period is nine months).
(8)A court shall not make an order under this section in the case of an offender convicted of a specified offence if—
(a)the offender has, during the period of three years ending with the date on which the offence was committed, committed a specified offence and successfully completed an approved course pursuant to an order made under this section or section 30A of this Act on conviction of that offence, or
(b)the specified offence was committed during his probationary period.
(9)A court shall not make an order under this section in the case of an offender unless—
(a)the court is satisfied that a place on the course specified in the order will be available for the offender,
(b)the offender appears to the court to be of or over the age of 17,
(c)the court has informed the offender (orally or in writing and in ordinary language) of the effect of the order and of the amount of the fees which he is required to pay for the course and when he must pay them, and
(d)the offender has agreed that the order should be made.
34BCertificates of completion of courses
(1)An offender shall be regarded for the purposes of section 34A of this Act as having completed a course satisfactorily if (and only if) a certificate that he has done so is received by the proper officer of the supervising court before the end of the unreduced period.
(2)If a certificate under subsection (1) above is so received before the end of the unreduced period but after the end of the period which would (apart from this subsection) be the reduced period, the reduced period is to be taken to end with the day on which the certificate is so received.
(3)A certificate under subsection (1) above is to be given by the course provider and shall be in such form, and contain such particulars, as may be prescribed by, or determined in accordance with, regulations made by the appropriate national authority.
(4)A course provider must give a certificate under subsection (1) above to the offender not later than fourteen days after the date specified in the order as the latest date for the completion of the course unless the offender—
(a)fails to make due payment of fees for the course,
(b)fails to attend the course in accordance with the course provider's reasonable instructions, or
(c)fails to comply with any other reasonable requirement of the course provider.
(5)Where a course provider decides not to give a certificate under subsection (1) above to the offender, he shall give written notice of the decision to the offender as soon as possible, and in any event not later than fourteen days after the date specified in the order as the latest date for completion of the course.
(6)An offender to whom a notice is given under subsection (5) above may, within such period as may be prescribed by rules of court, apply to the supervising court, or (if the supervising court is not the Crown Court, the High Court of Justiciary or the relevant local court) to either the supervising court or the relevant local court, for a declaration that the course provider's decision not to give a certificate under subsection (1) above was contrary to subsection (4) above.
(7)If the court grants the application, section 34A of this Act shall have effect as if the certificate had been duly received by the proper officer of the supervising court.
(8)If fourteen days after the date specified in the order as the latest date for completion of the course the course provider has given neither a certificate under subsection (1) above nor a notice under subsection (5) above, the offender may, within such period as may be prescribed by rules of court, apply to the supervising court, or (if the supervising court is not the Crown Court, the High Court of Justiciary or the relevant local court) to either the supervising court or the relevant local court, for a declaration that the course provider is in default.
(9)If the court grants the application, section 34A of this Act shall have effect as if the certificate had been duly received by the proper officer of the supervising court.
(10)A notice under subsection (5) above shall specify the ground on which it is given; and the appropriate national authority may by regulations make provision as to the form of notices under that subsection and as to the circumstances in which they are to be treated as given.
(11)Where the proper officer of a court receives a certificate under subsection (1) above, or a court grants an application under subsection (6) or (8) above, the proper officer or court must send notice of that fact to the Secretary of State; and the notice must be sent in such manner and to such address, and must contain such particulars, as the Secretary of State may determine.
34BAApproval of courses
(1)If an application is made to the appropriate national authority for the approval of a course for the purposes of section 34A of this Act, the appropriate national authority must decide whether to grant or refuse the application.
(2)In reaching that decision the appropriate national authority must have regard to—
(a)the nature of the course, and
(b)whether the course provider is an appropriate person to provide the course and administer its provision efficiently and effectively,and may take into account any recommendations made by any persons appointed to consider the application.
(3)A course may be approved subject to conditions specified by the appropriate national authority.
(4)An approval of a course is for the period specified by the appropriate national authority (which must not exceed seven years), subject to withdrawal of approval.
(5)Regulations made by the appropriate national authority may make provision in relation to the approval of courses and may, in particular, include provision—
(a)in relation to the making of applications for approval,
(b)for the payment in respect of applications for approval, or of approvals, (or of both) of fees of such amounts as are prescribed by the regulations,
(c)specifying the maximum fees that a person may be required to pay for a course and by when they are to be paid,
(d)for the monitoring of courses and course providers,
(e)in relation to withdrawing approval,
(f)for an appeal to lie to the Transport Tribunal against a refusal of an application for approval, the imposition of conditions on the grant of such an application or the withdrawal of approval, and
(g)authorising the appropriate national authority to make available (with or without charge) information about courses and course providers.
34CProvisions supplementary to sections 34A to 34BA
(1)The appropriate national authority may issue guidance to course providers, or to any category of course provider, as to the conduct of courses approved for the purposes of section 34A of this Act; and—
(a)course providers shall have regard to any guidance given to them under this subsection, and
(b)in determining for the purposes of section 34B of this Act whether any instructions or requirements of a course provider were reasonable, a court shall have regard to any guidance given to him under this subsection.
(2)The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision—
(a)amending section 34A(1)(b) of this Act by substituting for the period for the time being specified there a different period,
(b)amending section 34A(7) of this Act by substituting for the period for the time being specified there a different period, or by substituting for the fraction of the unreduced period for the time being specified there a different fraction of that period, (or by doing both), or
(c)amending section 34A(8)(a) of this Act by substituting for the period for the time being specified there a different period.
(3)In sections 34A to 34BA of this Act and this section—
“appropriate national authority” means (as respects Wales) the National Assembly for Wales and (otherwise) the Secretary of State;
“course provider”, in relation to a course, means the person by whom it is, or is to be, provided;
“probationary period” has the meaning given in section 1 of the Road Traffic (New Drivers) Act 1995;
“proper officer” means—
(a)
in relation to a magistrates' court in England and Wales, the designated officer for the court, and

(b)
otherwise, the clerk of the court;

“relevant local court”, in relation to an order under section 34A of this Act in the case of an offender, means—
(a)
in England and Wales, a magistrates' court acting for the local justice area in which the offender resides, and

(b)
in Scotland, the sheriff court for the district where the offender resides or, where the order is made by a stipendiary magistrate and the offender resides within his commission area, the district court for that area; and

“supervising court”, in relation to an order under section 34A of this Act, means—
(a)
in England and Wales, if the Crown Court made the order the Crown Court and otherwise a magistrates' court acting for the same local justice area as the court which made the order, and

(b)
in Scotland, the court which made the order.

(4)Any power to make regulations under section 34A, 34B or 34BA of this Act or this section includes power to make different provision for different cases, and to make such incidental or supplementary provision as appears necessary or appropriate.
(5)Any power to make regulations under section 34A, 34B or 34BA of this Act or this section shall be exercisable by statutory instrument.
(6)No regulations shall be made under section 34A of this Act or this section unless a draft of the regulations has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
(7)A statutory instrument containing regulations made under section 34B or 34BA of this Act by the Secretary of State shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.”

Drink-driving etc.
13High risk offenders: medical enquiries following disqualification
(1)In section 88 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (exceptions to requirement to hold driving licence), after subsection (2) insert—
“(2A)Subsection (1) above does not apply by virtue of an application mentioned in paragraph (b) of that subsection having been received by the Secretary of State if—
(a)the application was made as a result of, or in anticipation of, the expiry of a disqualification relevant to the licence applied for,
(b)either the nature of the disqualification or its imposition within a particular period after an earlier disqualification amounted to circumstances prescribed under subsection (4) of section 94 of this Act (disqualification: high risk offenders), and
(c)the Secretary of State has notified the applicant that, because of that, he will be subject to a requirement under paragraph (a) or (b) of subsection (5) of that section.”
(2)The amendment made by subsection (1) does not apply where the conviction in respect of which the disqualification was ordered was imposed before the coming into force of that subsection.
Commencement Information

I1	S. 13 in force at 1.6.2013 by S.I. 2013/1012, art. 2

F114Period of endorsement for failure to allow specimen to be tested
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Textual Amendments

F1	S. 14 repealed (8.6.2015) by Road Safety Act 2006 (c. 49), s. 61(1)(10), Sch. 7(4); S.I. 2015/560, art. 3(b) (with arts. 4-9)

Prospective

15Alcohol ignition interlocks
(1)In the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988, after section 34C insert—
“34DReduced disqualification period: alcohol ignition interlock programme orders
(1)This section applies where—
(a)a person is convicted of a relevant drink offence by or before a court,
(b)he has committed another relevant drink offence at any time during the period of ten years ending with the date of the conviction,
(c)the court makes an order under section 34 of this Act but does not make an order under section 34A of this Act, and
(d)the period stated by the court as that for which, apart from this section, he would be disqualified (“the unreduced period”) is not less than two years.
(2)In this section “relevant drink offence” means—
(a)an offence under paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of section 3A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (causing death by careless driving when unfit to drive through drink) committed when unfit to drive through drink,
(b)an offence under paragraph (b) of that subsection (causing death by careless driving with excess alcohol),
(c)an offence under paragraph (c) of that subsection (failing to provide a specimen) where the specimen is required in connection with drink or consumption of alcohol,
(d)an offence under section 4 of that Act (driving or being in charge when under influence of drink) committed by reason of unfitness through drink,
(e)an offence under section 5(1) of that Act (driving or being in charge with excess alcohol),
(f)an offence under section 7(6) of that Act (failing to provide a specimen) committed in the course of an investigation into an offence within any of the preceding paragraphs, or
(g)an offence under section 7A(6) of that Act (failing to allow a specimen to be subjected to a laboratory test) in the course of an investigation into an offence within any of the preceding paragraphs.
(3)Where this section applies, the court may specify a lesser period of disqualification (“the reduced period”) if it also makes an order (an “alcohol ignition interlock programme order”) requiring the offender to comply with the alcohol ignition interlock conditions.
(4)The difference between the unreduced period and the reduced period shall be a period specified in the order of—
(a)not less than 12 months, and
(b)not more than one half of the unreduced period.
(5)If the offender contravenes the alcohol ignition interlock conditions, a further order under section 34 disqualifying him for the rest of the unreduced period is to be treated as having been made by the court immediately before the contravention.
(6)“The alcohol ignition interlock conditions” are that the offender—
(a)must participate fully in an approved alcohol ignition interlock programme specified in the order during such part of the unreduced period as is so specified, and
(b)during the part of that period following the reduced period, must not drive a motor vehicle unless it is fitted with an alcohol ignition interlock in good working order and must not drive a motor vehicle which is so fitted when not using the alcohol ignition interlock properly.
(7)A court shall not make an alcohol ignition interlock programme order in the case of an offender unless—
(a)the court is satisfied that a place on the approved alcohol ignition interlock programme specified in the order will be available for the offender,
(b)the offender appears to the court to be of or over the age of 17,
(c)the court has informed the offender (orally or in writing and in ordinary language) of the effect of the order and the amount of the fees which he is required to pay for the programme and when he must pay them, and
(d)the offender has agreed that the order should be made.
(8)For the purposes of this section an “approved alcohol ignition interlock programme” is a programme approved by the appropriate national authority and involving the provision of an alcohol ignition interlock for use by the offender, training in its use and other education and counselling relating to the consumption of alcohol and driving.
(9)For the purposes of this section “alcohol ignition interlock” means a device—
(a)of a type approved by the Secretary of State, and
(b)designed to be fitted to a motor vehicle with the purpose of preventing the driving of the vehicle by a person who does not, both before starting driving the vehicle and at regular intervals while driving it, provide specimens of breath in which the proportion of alcohol is likely not to exceed the limit specified in subsection (10) below.
(10)That limit is 9 microgrammes of alcohol in 100 millilitres of breath or such other proportion of alcohol to breath as the Secretary of State may by regulations prescribe.
(11)For the purposes of this section an offender uses an alcohol ignition interlock properly if (and only if) he is complying with all the instructions given to him about its use as part of the approved alcohol ignition interlock programme.
(12)Where an alcohol ignition interlock is fitted to a motor vehicle as part of an approved alcohol ignition interlock programme relating to an offender, a person commits an offence if—
(a)he interferes with the alcohol ignition interlock with intent to cause it not to function or not to function properly, or
(b)he is a person other than the offender and provides or attempts to provide a specimen of breath for the purposes of the alcohol ignition interlock with intent to enable the driving (or continued driving) of the vehicle by the offender.
34ECertificates of failing fully to participate
(1)An offender shall be regarded for the purposes of section 34D of this Act as not fully participating in an approved alcohol ignition interlock programme if (and only if) a certificate that that is so is received by the proper officer of the supervising court.
(2)A certificate under subsection (1) above may be given if (and only if) the offender has failed—
(a)to make due payment of fees for the programme,
(b)to attend for training, education or counselling forming part of the programme in accordance with the programme provider's reasonable instructions,
(c)to attend at a place specified by the programme provider for the monitoring and maintenance of the alcohol ignition interlock, at a time specified by the programme provider or a person with whom the programme provider has made arrangements for its monitoring and maintenance, or
(d)to comply with any other reasonable requirement of the programme provider.
(3)A certificate under subsection (1) above is to be given by the programme provider and shall be in such form, and contain such particulars, as may be prescribed by, or determined in accordance with, regulations made by the appropriate national authority.
(4)Where a programme provider decides to give a certificate under subsection (1) above, he shall give written notice of the decision to the offender as soon as possible.
(5)An offender to whom a notice is given under subsection (4) above may, within such period as may be prescribed by rules of court, apply to the supervising court, or (if the supervising court is not the Crown Court, the High Court of Justiciary or the relevant local court) to either the supervising court or the relevant local court, for a declaration that the programme provider has given the certificate under subsection (1) above in contravention of subsection (2) above.
(6)If the court grants the application, section 34D of this Act shall have effect as if the certificate had not been duly received by the proper officer of the supervising court.
(7)A notice under subsection (4) above shall specify the ground on which it is given; and the appropriate national authority may by regulations make provision as to the form of notices under that subsection and as to the circumstances in which they are to be treated as given.
(8)Where the proper office of a court receives a certificate under subsection (1) above, or a court grants an application under subsection (5) above, the proper officer or court must send notice of that fact to the Secretary of State; and the notice must be sent in such manner and to such address, and must contain such particulars, as the Secretary of State may determine.
34FApproval of programmes
(1)If an application is made to the appropriate national authority for the approval of a programme for the purposes of section 34D of this Act, the appropriate national authority must decide whether to grant or refuse the application.
(2)In reaching that decision the appropriate national authority must have regard to—
(a)the nature of the programme, and
(b)whether the programme provider is an appropriate person to provide the programme and administer its provision efficiently and effectively,and may take into account any recommendations made by any persons appointed to consider the application.
(3)A programme may be approved subject to conditions specified by the appropriate national authority.
(4)An approval of a programme is for the period specified by the appropriate national authority (which must not exceed seven years), subject to withdrawal of approval.
(5)Regulations made by the appropriate national authority may make provision in relation to the approval of programmes and may, in particular, include provision—
(a)in relation to the making of applications for approval,
(b)for the payment in respect of applications for approval, or of approvals, (or of both) of fees of such amounts as are prescribed by the regulations,
(c)specifying the maximum fees that a person may be required to pay for a programme and by when they are to be paid,
(d)for the monitoring of programmes and programme providers,
(e)in relation to withdrawing approval,
(f)for an appeal to lie to the Transport Tribunal against a refusal of an application for approval, the imposition of conditions on the grant of such an application or the withdrawal of approval, and
(g)authorising the appropriate national authority to make available (with or without charge) information about programmes and programme providers.
34GProvisions supplementary to sections 34D to 34F
(1)The appropriate national authority may issue guidance to programme providers, or to any category of programme provider, as to the conduct of programmes approved for the purposes of section 34D of this Act; and—
(a)programme providers shall have regard to any guidance given to them under this subsection, and
(b)in determining for the purposes of section 34E of this Act whether any instructions or requirements of a programme provider were reasonable, a court shall have regard to any guidance given to him under this subsection.
(2)The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision—
(a)amending section 34D(1)(b) of this Act by substituting for the period for the time being specified there a different period,
(b)amending section 34D(1)(d) of this Act by substituting for the period for the time being specified there a different period, or
(c)amending section 34D(4) of this Act by substituting for the period for the time being specified there a different period, or by substituting for the fraction of the unreduced period for the time being specified there a different fraction of that period, (or by doing both).
(3)In sections 34D to 34F of this Act and this section—
“appropriate national authority” means (as respects Wales) the National Assembly for Wales and (otherwise) the Secretary of State;
“contravention” includes failure to comply;
“programme provider”, in relation to an alcohol ignition interlock programme, means the person by whom it is, or is to be, provided;
“proper officer” means—
(a)
in relation to a magistrates' court in England and Wales, the designated officer for the court, and

(b)
otherwise, the clerk of the court;

“relevant local court”, in relation to an alcohol ignition interlock programme order in the case of an offender, means—
(a)
in England and Wales, a magistrates' court acting for the local justice area in which the offender resides, and

(b)
in Scotland, the sheriff court for the district where the offender resides or, where the order is made by a stipendiary magistrate and the offender resides within his commission area, the district court for that area; and

“supervising court”, in relation to an alcohol ignition interlock programme order, means—
(a)
in England and Wales, if the Crown Court made the order the Crown Court and otherwise a magistrates' court acting for the same local justice area as the court which made the order, and

(b)
in Scotland, the court which made the order.

(4)Any power to make regulations under section 34D, 34E or 34F of this Act or this section includes power to make different provision for different cases, and to make such incidental or supplementary provision as appears to the appropriate national authority to be necessary or appropriate.
(5)Any power to make regulations under section 34D, 34E or 34F of this Act or this section shall be exercisable by statutory instrument.
(6)A statutory instrument containing regulations made under section 34D, 34E or 34F of this Act by the Secretary of State shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
(7)No regulations shall be made under this section unless a draft of the regulations has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.”
(2)In the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53), after section 41A insert—
“41BSuspension of certificate pending determination of applications under section 34E
(1)Where a person given a certificate under subsection (1) of section 34E of this Act makes an application to a court under subsection (5) of that section, the court may suspend the effect of the certificate pending the determination of the application.
(2)Where a court exercises its power under subsection (1) above it must send notice of the suspension to the Secretary of State.
(3)The notice must be sent in such manner and to such address and must contain such particulars, as the Secretary of State may determine.”
(3)In Schedule 1 to that Act (offences to which certain sections apply)—
(a)in paragraph 3, after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa)an offence under section 34D(12) of this Act,”, and
(b)in paragraph 4, before paragraph (a) insert—
“(za)an offence under section 34D(12) of this Act,”.
(4)In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to that Act (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), after the entry relating to section 27 of that Act insert—
“Section 34D(12) of this Act	Interference etc. with alcohol ignition interlock.	Summarily.	Level 4 on the standard scale if the motor vehicle to which the alcohol ignition interlock is fitted is a goods vehicle or a vehicle adapted to carry more than eight passengers. Level 3 on the standard scale in any other case.	 	 	 ”
Prospective

16Experimental period for section 15
(1)Subject as follows, no order shall be made under section 34D of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (inserted by section 15) after—
(a)the end of 2010, or
(b)such later time as may be specified in an order made by the Secretary of State.
(2)But at any time before the restriction imposed by subsection (1) has taken effect, the Secretary of State may by order provide that it shall not do so.
(3)In this section “the experimental period” means the period beginning when section 15 comes into force and ending—
(a)when the restriction imposed by subsection (1) takes effect, or
(b)if the Secretary of State makes an order under subsection (2), on a date specified in the order.
(4)During the experimental period—
(a)no order shall be made under section 34D by virtue of a person's conviction under section 3A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52), and
(b)no order shall be made under section 34D except by a magistrates' court acting for a local justice area (or, in Scotland, a sheriff court for a district or a stipendiary magistrate for a commission area) which is for the time being designated for the purposes of this section.
(5)In relation to orders made under section 34D during the experimental period, section 34E(5) shall have effect with the omission of the references to the relevant local court.
(6)The power to designate an area or district for the purposes of this section is exercisable by the Secretary of State by order, and includes power to revoke a designation previously made.
(7)An order under subsection (6) must specify the period for which an area or district is designated, and may—
(a)specify different periods for different areas or districts, and
(b)extend or shorten any period previously specified.
(8)The power to make an order under subsection (1) is not exercisable after the end of 2010, and no more than one order may be made under that subsection.
(9)Any power of the Secretary of State to make orders under this section is exercisable by statutory instrument, and—
(a)no order is to be made under subsection (1) or (2) unless a draft of it has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament, and
(b)any statutory instrument containing an order under subsection (6) is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.

Deposits and prohibition on driving
11Financial penalty deposits
(1)In the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53), after Part 3 insert—
“Part 3A
Financial penalty deposits
90APower to impose financial penalty deposit requirement
(1)A constable or vehicle examiner may impose a financial penalty deposit requirement on a person on any occasion if the conditions in this section are satisfied.
(2)The constable or vehicle examiner must have reason to believe—
(a)that the person is committing or has on that occasion committed an offence relating to a motor vehicle, and
(b)that the person, the offence and the circumstances in which the offence is committed are of a description specified in an order made by the Secretary of State.
(3)The person must be—
(a)given written notification that it appears likely that proceedings will be brought against him in respect of the offence, or
(b)(if the offence is a fixed penalty offence) either given such notification or given a fixed penalty notice (or, in Scotland, handed a conditional offer) in respect of the offence.
(4)The person must fail to provide a satisfactory address; and for this purpose “a satisfactory address” is an address in the United Kingdom at which the constable or vehicle examiner considers it likely that it would be possible to find the person whenever necessary to do so in connection with the proceedings, fixed penalty notice or conditional offer.
(5)The person who is to impose the financial penalty deposit requirement—
(a)if a constable, must be in uniform, and
(b)if a vehicle examiner, must produce his authority.
90BFinancial penalty deposit requirement
(1)For the purposes of this Part of this Act a financial penalty deposit requirement is a requirement to make a payment of the appropriate amount to the Secretary of State—
(a)in a manner specified in an order made by him, and
(b)either immediately or within the relevant period.
(2)In this Part of this Act “the appropriate amount”, in relation to an offence and a person, is an amount specified in relation to the offence in an order made by the Secretary of State; and different amounts may be so specified—
(a)by reference to whether the person is given notification that it appears likely that proceedings will be brought against him or given a fixed penalty notice (or handed a conditional offer), and
(b)otherwise by reference to the circumstances of the offence.
(3)In this Part of this Act “the relevant period” means—
(a)if the person was given a fixed penalty notice and proceedings are not brought in respect of the offence by virtue of this Act before the end of the suspended enforcement period, the suspended enforcement period,
(b)if he was handed a conditional offer and proceedings are not brought in respect of the offence by virtue of this Act before the end of the period of 28 days following the date on which the conditional offer was given or any longer period specified in the conditional offer, that period, and
(c)otherwise, the period ending with the person being charged with the offence.
90CMaking of payment in compliance with requirement
(1)This section applies where a person on whom a financial penalty deposit requirement is imposed in respect of an offence makes a payment of the appropriate amount in accordance with section 90B(1) of this Act (and any order made under it).
(2)On payment by the person of the appropriate amount the person by whom the payment is received must issue him with a written receipt for the payment specifying the effect of the following provisions of this section.
(3)If the person was handed a conditional offer—
(a)the person is entitled to give notice requesting a hearing in respect of the offence, and
(b)the written receipt must specify the manner in which such notice is to be given.
(4)In a case where—
(a)a fixed penalty notice relating to the offence has been given to the person or a conditional offer so relating has been handed to him,
(b)the person does not give notice requesting a hearing in respect of the offence before the end of the relevant period in the appropriate manner, and
(c)proceedings are not brought in respect of the offence by virtue of this Act,subsection (6) below applies.
(5)In subsection (4)(b) above “the appropriate manner” means—
(a)if the person was given a fixed penalty notice, the manner specified in the fixed penalty notice, and
(b)if he was handed a conditional offer, the manner specified in the written receipt under subsection (2) above.
(6)Where this subsection applies, the Secretary of State must—
(a)apply so much of the payment as does not exceed the amount of the fixed penalty in or towards payment of the fixed penalty, and
(b)take the appropriate steps to make any appropriate refund to the person.
(7)In any other case—
(a)if the person is informed that he is not to be prosecuted for the offence, is acquitted of the offence or is convicted but not fined in respect of it, or the prosecution period comes to an end without a prosecution having been commenced against him in respect of it, subsection (9) below applies, and
(b)if a fine is imposed on the person in respect of the offence (otherwise than as a result of a conviction obtained on a prosecution commenced after the end of the prosecution period), subsection (10) below applies.
(8)In this Part of this Act “the prosecution period” means the period of twelve months beginning with the imposition of the financial penalty deposit requirement or, if shorter, any period after which no prosecution may be commenced in respect of the offence.
(9)Where this subsection applies, the Secretary of State must take the appropriate steps to make the appropriate refund to the person.
(10)Where this subsection applies, the Secretary of State must—
(a)apply so much of the payment as does not exceed the amount of the fine in or towards payment of the fine, and
(b)take the appropriate steps to make any appropriate refund to the person.
(11)Where the Secretary of State is required by this section to take the appropriate steps to make an appropriate refund, he must take such steps to trace the person and to make the refund to him, by such means, as are specified in an order made by the Secretary of State.
(12)In this Part of this Act “the appropriate refund”, in any case, is a refund of—
(a)where subsection (6) above applies, so much of the payment as exceeds the amount of the fixed penalty,
(b)where subsection (9) above applies, the amount of the payment, and
(c)where subsection (10) above applies, so much of the amount of the payment as exceeds the amount of the fine,together with interest calculated in accordance with provision made by order made by the Treasury.
90DProhibition on driving on failure to make payment
(1)This section applies where a person on whom a financial penalty deposit requirement is imposed does not make an immediate payment of the appropriate amount in accordance with section 90B(1) of this Act (and any order made under it).
(2)The constable or vehicle examiner by whom the requirement was imposed may prohibit the driving on a road of any vehicle of which the person was in charge at the time of the offence by giving to the person notice in writing of the prohibition.
(3)The prohibition—
(a)shall come into force as soon as the notice is given, and
(b)shall continue in force until the happening of whichever of the events in subsection (4) below occurs first.
(4)Those events are—
(a)the person making a payment of the appropriate amount in accordance with section 90B(1) of this Act (and any order made under it) at any time during the relevant period,
(b)(where a fixed penalty notice was given, or a conditional offer handed, to the person in respect of the offence) payment of the fixed penalty,
(c)the person being convicted or acquitted of the offence,
(d)the person being informed that he is not to be prosecuted for the offence, and
(e)the coming to an end of the prosecution period.
(5)A constable or vehicle examiner may by direction in writing require the person to remove the vehicle to which the prohibition relates (and, if it is a motor vehicle drawing a trailer, also to remove the trailer) to such place and subject to such conditions as are specified in the direction; and the prohibition does not apply to the removal of the vehicle (or trailer) in accordance with the direction.
(6)A person who—
(a)drives a vehicle in contravention of a prohibition under this section,
(b)causes or permits a vehicle to be driven in contravention of such a prohibition, or
(c)fails to comply within a reasonable time with a direction under subsection (5) above,is guilty of an offence.
(7)The Secretary of State may by order provide for exceptions from subsection (6) above.
(8)Schedule 4 to the Road Safety Act 2006 makes provision about the immobilisation of vehicles the driving of which has been prohibited under this section and about their removal and disposal.
90EOrders about financial penalty deposits
(1)Any power conferred by section 90A, 90B, 90C or 90D of this Act on the Secretary of State or the Treasury to make an order shall be exercisable by statutory instrument.
(2)Before making an order under any of those sections the Secretary of State or the Treasury must consult with such representative organisations as appear appropriate.
(3)An order under any of those sections may make different provision for different cases.
(4)No order shall be made under section 90B(2) of this Act unless a draft of the instrument containing it has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
(5)A statutory instrument containing an order under section 90A, 90B(1), 90C or 90D of this Act shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
90FFinancial penalty deposits: interpretation
In sections 90A to 90D of this Act—
“the appropriate amount” has the meaning given by section 90B(2) of this Act,
“the appropriate refund” has the meaning given by section 90C(12) of this Act,
“conditional offer” means a notice under section 75(3)(a) of this Act,
“financial penalty deposit requirement” has the meaning given by section 90B(1) of this Act,
“fixed penalty notice” has the meaning given by section 52 of this Act,
“fixed penalty offence” is to be construed in accordance with section 51 of this Act,
“the prosecution period” has the meaning given by section 90C(8) of this Act,
“the relevant period” has the meaning given by section 90B(3) of this Act,
“suspended enforcement period” is to be construed in accordance with section 52(3)(a) of this Act, and
“vehicle examiner” means an examiner appointed under section 66A of the Road Traffic Act 1988.”
(2)In Part 1 of Schedule 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (prosecution and punishment of offences: offences under the Traffic Acts), after the entry relating to section 67 of that Act insert—
“Section 90D(6) of this Act	Driving, etc., vehicle in contravention of prohibition for failure to pay financial penalty deposit, etc.	Summarily.	Level 5 on the standard scale.	 	 	 ”
(3)Schedule 4 makes provision about the immobilisation of vehicles the driving of which has been prohibited and about their removal and disposal.
Commencement Information

I1	S. 11 in force at 5.1.2009 by S.I. 2008/3164, art. 2(b)

12Prohibition on driving: immobilisation, removal and disposal of vehicles
(1)In section 99A of the Transport Act 1968 (c. 73) (powers to prohibit driving of vehicles in connection with contravention of provisions about drivers' hours), after subsection (5) insert—
“(6)Schedule 4 to the Road Safety Act 2006 makes provision about the immobilisation of vehicles the driving of which has been prohibited under subsection (1) of this section and about their removal and disposal.”
(2)In section 3 of the Road Traffic (Foreign Vehicles) Act 1972 (c. 27) (prohibition on driving of foreign vehicles: enforcement provisions), after subsection (7) insert—
“(8)Schedule 4 to the Road Safety Act 2006 makes provision about the immobilisation of vehicles the driving of which has been prohibited under section 1 of this Act and about their removal and disposal.”
(3)In section 73 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (prohibition on driving of unfit or overloaded vehicles: supplementary provisions), after subsection (4) insert—
“(5)Schedule 4 to the Road Safety Act 2006 makes provision about the immobilisation of vehicles the driving of which has been prohibited under section 69 or 70 of this Act and about their removal and disposal.”

New system of endorsement
8Driving record
In the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53), after section 97 insert—
“97AMeaning of “driving record”
(1)In this Act “driving record”, in relation to a person, means a record in relation to the person maintained by the Secretary of State and designed to be endorsed with particulars relating to offences committed by the person under the Traffic Acts.
(2)The Secretary of State may make arrangements for the following persons to have access, by such means as the Secretary of State may determine, to information held on a person's driving record—
(a)courts,
(b)constables,
(c)fixed penalty clerks,
(d)the person in respect of whom the record is maintained and persons authorised by him, and
(e)other persons prescribed in regulations made by the Secretary of State.
(3)The power to make regulations under subsection (2)(e) above shall be exercisable by statutory instrument.
(4)No regulations shall be made under subsection (2)(e) above unless a draft of the instrument containing them has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.”
Commencement Information

I1	S. 8 in force at 1.4.2009 by S.I. 2008/3164, art. 4(a)

9Unlicensed and foreign drivers
(1)The Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 is amended as follows.
(2)In section 44 (endorsement of licences)—
F1(a). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(b)for the heading substitute “ Orders for endorsement ”.
(3)After that section insert—
“44AEndorsement of driving record in accordance with order
(1)Where the court orders the endorsement of a person's driving record with any particulars or penalty points it must send notice of the order to the Secretary of State.
(2)On receiving the notice, the Secretary of State must endorse those particulars or penalty points on the person's driving record.
(3)A notice sent by the court to the Secretary of State in pursuance of this section must be sent in such manner and to such address and contain such particulars as the Secretary of State may require.”
F2(4). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(5)After section 57 insert—
“57AEndorsement of driving records without hearings
(1)Subject to subsection (2) below, where a person who is not the holder of a licence has been given a fixed penalty notice under section 54 of this Act in respect of an offence involving obligatory endorsement, his driving record may be endorsed in accordance with this section without any order of a court.
(2)A person's driving record may not be endorsed under this section if at the end of the suspended enforcement period—
(a)he has given notice, in the manner specified in the fixed penalty notice, requesting a hearing in respect of the offence to which the fixed penalty notice relates, and
(b)the fixed penalty has not been paid in accordance with this Part of this Act.
(3)If payment of the fixed penalty is made before the end of the suspended enforcement period and the person to whom the payment is made is the fixed penalty clerk, the fixed penalty clerk must send to the Secretary of State notice of the relevant particulars which are to be endorsed on the person's driving record.
(4)Where any sum determined by reference to the fixed penalty is registered under section 71 of this Act for enforcement against the person as a fine in a case where the fixed penalty is required to be paid to the fixed penalty clerk, the fixed penalty clerk must send to the Secretary of State notice of the relevant particulars which are to be endorsed on the person's driving record—
(a)if he is himself the person who registers the sum, on the registration of that sum, and
(b)in any other case, on being notified of the registration by the person who registers that sum.
(5)The Secretary of State must endorse the relevant particulars on the person's driving record if—
(a)he receives notice of them under subsection (3) or (4) above,
(b)the fixed penalty is paid to him before the end of the suspended enforcement period, or
(c)in a case where the fixed penalty is required to be paid to the Secretary of State, any sum determined by reference to the fixed penalty is registered under section 71 of this Act for enforcement against the person as a fine.
(6)References in this section to the relevant particulars are to—
(a)particulars of the offence, including the date when it was committed, and
(b)the number of penalty points to be attributed to the offence.”
(6)Schedule 2 contains further amendments about the endorsement of driving records in the case of unlicensed and certain foreign drivers.
Textual Amendments

F1	S. 9(2)(a) repealed (8.6.2015) by Road Safety Act 2006 (c. 49), s. 61(1)(10), Sch. 7(4); S.I. 2015/560, art. 3(b) (with arts. 4-9)

F2	S. 9(4) repealed (8.6.2015) by Road Safety Act 2006 (c. 49), s. 61(1)(10), Sch. 7(4); S.I. 2015/560, art. 3(b) (with arts. 4-9)

Commencement Information

I2	S. 9 in force at 1.4.2009 by S.I. 2008/3164, art. 4(b)

10All drivers
(1)The Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) (as amended by section 9 and Schedule 2) is amended as follows.
(2)In section 44 (orders for endorsement)—
(a)in subsection (1), for “the counterpart of any licence held by him” substitute “ his driving record ”, and
(b)omit subsection (3A).
(3)Section 54 (notices on-the-spot etc.) is amended as follows.
(4)For subsections (3) to (5E) substitute—
“(3)Where the offence appears to the constable or vehicle examiner to involve obligatory endorsement, the constable or vehicle examiner may only give him a fixed penalty notice under subsection (2) above in respect of the offence if—
(a)the constable or vehicle examiner is satisfied, on accessing information held on his driving record, that he would not be liable to be disqualified under section 35 of this Act if he were convicted of that offence, and
(b)in the case of a person who is the holder of a licence, he produces it for inspection by the constable or vehicle examiner and surrenders it to him to be retained and dealt with in accordance with this Part of this Act.
(4)Where the offence appears to the constable or vehicle examiner to involve obligatory endorsement, subsection (5) below applies if—
(a)the constable or vehicle examiner is unable to satisfy himself, by accessing information held on his driving record, that he would not be liable to be disqualified under section 35 of this Act if he were convicted of that offence, or
(b)in the case of a person who is the holder of a licence, he does not produce it for inspection by the constable or vehicle examiner.
(5)Where this subsection applies, the constable or vehicle examiner may give the person a notice stating that if—
(a)he delivers the notice and (if he is the holder of a licence) his licence in accordance with subsection (5A) below, and
(b)the requirements of subsection (5B) below are met,he will then be given a fixed penalty notice in respect of the offence.
(5A)Delivery must—
(a)if the notice is given by a constable, be made in person, within seven days after the notice is given, to a constable or authorised person at the police station specified in the notice (being a police station chosen by the person concerned), or
(b)if the notice is given by a vehicle examiner, be made (either by post or in person), within fourteen days after the notice is given, to the Secretary of State at the place specified in the notice.
(5B)If a person to whom a notice has been given under subsection (5) above delivers the notice and (if he is the holder of a licence) his licence in accordance with subsection (5A) above, and the following requirements are met, that is—
(a)the person to whom the notice is delivered is satisfied, on accessing information held on his driving record, that he would not be liable to be disqualified under section 35 of this Act if he were convicted of the offence, and
(b)if he is the holder of a licence, it is delivered to be retained and dealt with in accordance with this Part of this Act,the person to whom the notice is delivered must give him a fixed penalty notice in respect of the offence to which the notice under subsection (5) above relates.”

Fixed penalties
3Graduated fixed penalties
(1)The Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (c. 53) is amended as follows.
(2)In section 53 (amount of fixed penalty), for subsections (2) and (3) substitute—
“(2)Any order made under subsection (1)(a) above in relation to an offence may make provision for the fixed penalty for the offence to be different depending on the circumstances, including (in particular)—
(a)the nature of the contravention or failure constituting the offence,
(b)how serious it is,
(c)the area, or sort of place, where it takes place, and
(d)whether the offender appears to have committed any offence or offences of a description specified in the order during a period so specified.”
(3)In section 84(2) (regulations about surcharge notices), for paragraphs (b) and (c) substitute “and
(b)the amount of the penalty stated in the offer is less than the fixed penalty applicable in the circumstances,”.
Commencement Information

I1	S. 3 in force at 5.1.2009 by S.I. 2008/3164, art. 2(a)

4Graduated fixed penalty points
(1)Section 28 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (penalty points to be attributed to an offence) is amended as follows.
(2)For subsection (3) substitute—
“(3)For the purposes of sections 57(5) and 77(5) of this Act, the number of penalty points to be attributed to an offence is—
(a)where both a range of numbers and a number followed by the words “(fixed penalty)” is shown in the last column of Part 1 of Schedule 2 to this Act in relation to the offence, that number,
(b)where a range of numbers followed by the words “or appropriate penalty points (fixed penalty)” is shown there in relation to the offence, the appropriate number of penalty points for the offence, and
(c)where only a range of numbers is shown there in relation to the offence, the lowest number in the range.
(3A)For the purposes of subsection (3)(b) above the appropriate number of penalty points for an offence is such number of penalty points as the Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument prescribe.
(3B)An order made under subsection (3A) above in relation to an offence may make provision for the appropriate number of penalty points for the offence to be different depending on the circumstances, including (in particular)—
(a)the nature of the contravention or failure constituting the offence,
(b)how serious it is,
(c)the area, or sort of place, where it takes place, and
(d)whether the offender appears to have committed any offence or offences of a description specified in the order during a period so specified.”
(3)In subsection (7), in paragraph (b), after “penalty)” insert “ or the words “or appropriate penalty points (fixed penalty)” .
(4)Before the word “and” at the end of that paragraph insert—
“(ba)substitute the words “or appropriate penalty points (fixed penalty)” for a number together with the words “(fixed penalty)”, or substitute a number together with the words “(fixed penalty)” for the words “or appropriate penalty points (fixed penalty)”, in relation to an offence in the last column of Part 1 or 2,”.
(5)After subsection (8) insert—
“(8A)Before making any order under subsection (3A) above the Secretary of State must consult with such representative organisations as he thinks fit.”
(6)In subsection (9), for “subsection (7) above” substitute “ this section ”.
Commencement Information

I2	S. 4 in force at 31.3.2009 by S.I. 2008/3164, art. 3(a)

5Giving of fixed penalty notices by vehicle examiners
Schedule 1 contains provision about the giving of fixed penalty notices by vehicle examiners and connected matters.
Commencement Information

I3	S. 5 in force at 31.3.2009 by S.I. 2008/3164, art. 3(b)

6Goods vehicles operator licensing
(1)The Goods Vehicles (Licensing of Operators) Act 1995 (c. 23) is amended as follows.
(2)In subsection (1) of section 9 (duty of applicant for operator's licence to notify traffic commissioner of notifiable conviction subsequent to making of application), insert at the end “ or there is issued a notifiable fixed penalty notice within the meaning given in paragraph 7 of that Schedule. ”
(3)In subsection (3)(b) of that section (offence of failing to notify conviction of transport manager), insert at the end “ or the issue to the transport manager of a fixed penalty notice or conditional offer under Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 in respect of such an offence. ”
(4)In subsection (1) of section 26 (revocation, suspension and curtailment of operators' licences), after paragraph (c) insert—
“(ca)that during those five years a fixed penalty notice or conditional offer has been issued under Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 to the licence-holder in respect of an offence within sub-paragraph (i) of paragraph (c) or to a servant or agent of the licence-holder in respect of an offence within sub-paragraph (ii) of that paragraph;”.
(5)In paragraph (d) of that subsection, insert at the end “ or an issue of a fixed penalty notice or conditional offer under Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 to the licence-holder or a servant or agent of his in respect of such an offence; ”.
(6)In paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 (information about, and convictions of, applicants for and holders of operators' licences), after paragraph (f) insert—
“(fa)particulars of any notifiable fixed penalty notices which have been issued during those five years;”.
(7)After paragraph 6 of that Schedule insert—
“ “Notifiable fixed penalty notices”
7In paragraph 1(fa) “notifiable fixed penalty notice” means any fixed penalty notice or conditional offer under Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988—
(a)issued to a relevant person in respect of an offence such as is mentioned in paragraph 5, or
(b)issued to a servant or agent of a relevant person in respect of an offence within paragraph 4(b).”
Commencement Information

I4	S. 6 in force at 31.3.2009 by S.I. 2008/3164, art. 3(c)

7Public passenger vehicle licensing
(1)The Public Passenger Vehicles Act 1981 (c. 14) is amended as follows.
(2)In section 19 (duty of applicant for PSV operator's licence to inform traffic commissioners of relevant convictions etc.), after subsection (2) insert—
“(2A)For the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) above the issue to a person of a fixed penalty notice or conditional offer under Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 in respect of an offence prescribed for the purposes of this Act is to be treated as if it were a relevant conviction of him.”
(3)In sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 1 of Schedule 3 (supplementary provisions as to qualifications for PSV operator's licence), before the word “and” at the end of paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa)relevant fixed penalty notices issued to him and to his employees and agents;”.
(4)In sub-paragraph (2) of that paragraph, before the word “and” at the end of paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa)relevant fixed penalty notices issued to the company's officers, employees and agents;”.
(5)After that sub-paragraph insert—
“(2A)In sub-paragraphs (1)(aa) and (2)(aa) above “relevant fixed penalty notice” means a fixed penalty notice or conditional offer issued under Part 3 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 in respect of an offence prescribed for the purposes of this Act.”

Payments for road safety
1Road safety grants
For section 40 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c. 52) (power to subsidise promotion of road safety by bodies other than local authorities) substitute—
“40Road safety grants
(1)A national transport authority may make payments to any local authority or any other authority or body for meeting the whole or part of the capital or running costs of any measures for promoting road safety.
(2)A “national transport authority” means—
(a)the Secretary of State acting with the approval of the Treasury, or
(b)the National Assembly for Wales.”
Prospective

2Application of surplus income from safety camera enforcement
(1)Section 38 of the Vehicles (Crime) Act 2001 (c. 3) (unified power for Secretary of State to fund speed cameras etc.) is amended as follows.
(2)In subsections (3) and (4), for “this section” substitute “ subsection (1) ”.
(3)After subsection (4) insert—
“(4A)The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision for making to public authorities for road safety purposes payments calculated by reference to any amount by which—
(a)the amount of the sums paid into the Consolidated Fund in consequence of the commission of offences to which subsection (2) applies and which are detected by cameras, exceeds
(b)the amount of any payments made under subsection (1).”


