Question: Hello all. I have been caught drink driving. Ima second year med student and have 2 severely disabled children. I was pulled over for driving too slow and changing lanes. I was then breathalyser. Blew 50 at the road side. I was taken to the police station and was unable to blow into a breathalyser so I’ve had a blood test done. I’m about to get this sent off. The test was done 2 hours later roughly. I was released without charge pending blood tests. I was released blowing 35 at roughly 2 hours after.
I’m so devastated as I’ve had to resit a year due to failing and I think I have ruined my career. I’m so ashamed and I’m finding things extremely difficult. I am about to report this to the medical school but I’m scared and unsure of what to do next. I am about to send the blood test off myself
Answer: When you alert your university, it will trigger a fitness to practice review. This will be immediately postponed until the criminal investigation has concluded although the university will likely take interim measures which may include restricting any placements or suspending you. You should alert the university immediately if you have still not already done so. I appreciate you want some form of guidance and are scared, but informing the GMC (in this case your university when you are still a student) needs to be the very first thing you do in any future situation like this. This fitness to practice review will be entirely university-led and will not involve the GMC or any other external body. Even if you are not charged by the police, you will still to be subject to this review even if it goes on to conclude there’s no case to answer. My biggest bit of advice to you is to really get involved with the university. Utilise all the university support schemes fully. Having university-based evidence that you are engaging with them to address the problem will be valuable. Make sure you have full attendance, participate actively in activities, clubs and organisations. Being able to demonstrate you are an actively engaged student with references and examples from within your university community also have the potential to make a fairly sizeable impact which could sway their decision. Are you a member of the MDU? If not you should join. They will be able to help you in preparation for your review and guide you on what to say and how to say it. Provided you can sort this issue with the university, this will not be a major problem when you apply for provisional registration pre-F1 with GMC. Although you are going to have to explain this to them. Even if you aren’t charged you are still going to have to declare your fitness to practice review at the point of provisional registration and explain to them what triggered it. So even if you become aware from your own sample that your bloods will come back under, for example, it is still a good idea to fully engage with the university in as many ways as possible as a positive outcome from the university review will make things easier with the GMC in a few years time.
Question: I have been charged with drink driving and I am now on bail, what does this mean exactly?
Answer: Bail can be granted by either a court of law or the police. Where bail is granted, a person is released from custody until the next date when they have been instructed to attend court or the police station. Anybody released on bail will be given a bail sheet containing this information. It is an offence not to attend on the date instructed and any person who does not attend on the given date will be in breach of bail. Breach of bail is a criminal offence and people who breach bail may be prosecuted for this offence alongside the original offence(s). An arrest warrant is usually issued for anyone who breaches bail and doesn't attend the court or the police station on the date instructed.
Question: What should I do in preparation for my drink driving court case?
Answer: You should:
Consult with a solicitor as soon as possible. You will then be able to instruct the solicitor to act on your behalf during your drink driving court case or at the very least have the facts of your case and all evidence against you examined. You may be able to get a legal aid solicitor, if not you will have to instruct a solicitor on a private fee paying basis. You could also represent yourself at court or use the services of a duty solicitor on the day of your court case (free of charge), however the time a duty solicitor can spend on your case will be very limited and will depend on their workload.
You should decide if you are going to plead guilty or not guilty, a solicitor can also advise you on this matter. If you intend to plead guilty then obtaining character references off members of the community (friends, colleagues and family) is always a good idea. They should refer to your character, work ethic, community involvement and achievements. They should be addressed to 'The Presiding Magistrates' and should note that the referee is aware of the specific offence with which you are charged. Composing a letter to the judge from yourself may not be a bad idea either.
You should find out which court you have to appear at and how to get there. Courts do not take kindly to people who turn up late.
Question: What will happen on the day of my drink driving court case and what should I do?
Answer: You should:
Arrive on time. Usually this is before 9.45am, however your solicitor may have arranged to meet and consult with you earlier than this. DO NOT ARRIVE LATE, it shows disrespect to the court.
Show respect to the court and presiding magistrates by dressing smartly and being polite and courteous towards them. It also helps if you are genuinely remorseful as this will show.
Bring your driving licence with you as the chances are you will be getting a driving ban and your driving licence will be taken from you.
On your first appearance in court you will normally be asked to enter your plea of 'guilty' or 'not guilty'. If you plead 'not guilty' then the court case will be adjourned until a future date where you will stand trial.
If you plead 'guilty' or are found guilty after a trial then you may:
Receive your sentence immediately; or
Be remanded in custody and summoned to return to the courts for sentencing at a later date; or
Be released on bail to return to the courts for sentencing at a later date.
Either way you will have to surrender your driving licence to the courts (if you have not already done so) and will more than likely be subject to an interim driving ban which means you are effectively banned from driving as from that date and any driving ban you may receive at a later date will run from that date.
When magistrates adjourn sentencing to a later date it is usually because they have requested a pre-sentence report to be carried out, they will usually tell you what kind of sentence they are considering imposing.
Question: What is a pre-sentence report?
Answer: When deciding what sentence to impose, magistrates have to take into account the facts of the case alongside the circumstances of the offender. A pre-sentence report is carried out by a probation officer and is an impartial report assessing the offenders background, reasons for offending and risk to the public. It also assesses the offenders suitability for various sentencing options the court may be considering imposing.
Question: What sentences are available for magistrates to impose for drinking driving offences?
Answer: Magistrates can impose the following sentences for drinking and driving:
- Driving Bans/Disqualifications
- Fines
- Community Penalty Orders
- Imprisonment
Imprisonment is usually used for more serious offences and repeat offenders. The seriousness of the offence depends on numerous factors including but not limited to:
- the level of alcohol in a defendants body at the time off the offence
- whether or not any accident occurred
- whether or not any damage was caused to property
- whether or not anybody was injured
- whether or not the offender has any relevant previous convictions
Question: What is a community penalty order?
Answer: A community penalty order is an alternative to a custodial prison sentence. It can combine punishment with rehabilitation. There are a range of community orders available and requirements are often combined to make a bespoke community penalty order which is relevant to an individual offender. The range of orders available include:
Compulsory unpaid work requirement (aka Community Service): The compulsory unpaid work requirement requires offenders to carry out unpaid work (between 40 and 300 hours) on projects that benefit the community and under close supervision. Offenders can be given individual placements such as working in a charity shop or a community care home. They can also be given group placements where a group of offenders will be supervised by an unpaid work supervisor. Group placements can involve tidying up local parks and beauty spots, painting and decorating community centres, cutting grass and various other tasks. Unpaid work must be completed within 12 months of the sentence being imposed and will take place at least once a week for at least six and a half hours.
Curfew Requirement (Electronic Tagging): The curfew requirement is a punishment which is similar to house arrest. An offender is required to stay indoors (usually at their home) between certain hours of the day i.e. 7pm until 7am. An electronic tag is attached to the offenders ankle or wrist and monitoring equipment is installed in the offenders home which alerts a monitoring service if the offender is absent during curfew hours.
Supervision Requirement: The supervision requirement requires the offender to attend appointments with an offender manager (usually a probation officer) at their local probation office. The length of supervision and frequency of contact varies. The offender manager will work with the offender to help ensure the risk of future offending is kept to a minimum. An offender manager may delegate supervision to another person who can provide the offender with specialised help, support and/or advice.
Alcohol treatment requirement: The alcohol treatment requirement provides access to tailored alcohol treatment programs that are designed to reduce alcohol abuse and/or dependency. The offender must express a willingness to comply with the requirement and work at reducing their alcohol addiction.
Note: Failure to comply with any community order requirements that are imposed may result in an offender appearing at court again for breaching their community order. The original sentence will then be reviewed and further penalties could be imposed which could include imprisonment.
Question: Can I appeal against my sentence or conviction?
Answer: Yes. You should lodge an appeal within 21 days. If the conviction is appealed against then there will be a re-trial at the crown court in front of a judge and two magistrates. If only the sentence is in dispute then it will be up to a crown court judge to consider your appeal. The judge may decide to increase the sentence, reduce it or leave it as it is. Your solicitor can advise you on how to appeal your sentence or conviction. Alternatively you can download the appeal form to appeal to the crown court and/or the magistrates court yourself. You can download the form in PDF format https://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure-rules/criminal/docs/crimpr-part63-appealnotice.pdf  and in word format  http://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure-rules/criminal/docs/october-2015/ahc001-eng.doc. You can then fill out the appeal form yourself and send it to the relevant court(s).
Question: How long does a drink driving related conviction stay on my record before it becomes spent?
Answer: The Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 [2] allows certain convictions to become 'spent' after a specified period of time (the rehabilitation period). The period of time before a conviction can become spent will depend on the disposal administered or the sentence imposed. The Rehabilitation of offenders act states 'a person who has become a rehabilitated person for the purposes on this act in respect of a conviction shall be treated for all purposes in law as a person who has not committed or been charged with or prosecuted for or convicted of or sentenced for the offence or offences which were subject of that conviction'. This means that in most circumstances an individual who has spent convictions does not have to declare them to employers when applying for most jobs, insurers etc. However there are exceptions to this rule whereby both spent and unspent convictions need to be disclosed for certain professions, offices, employments, occupations, licences, certificates, permits and proceedings as set out in The Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (Exceptions) Order 1975. Some rehabilitation periods begin on the date of conviction while some rehabilitation periods begin upon completion of sentence. The rehabilitation periods which begin once a sentence has been completed are commonly referred to as 'buffer periods'.
Rehabilitation periods for sentences with additional 'buffer periods'

The table below sets out rehabilitation period which begins once the sentence has been completed.

Sentence / Disposal	Adults (18 & over)	Youth (18 & under)
Community order	12 months	6 months
Custodial sentence of over 4 years	Never spent	Never spent
Custodial sentence of over 30 months and up to and including 48 months	7 years	3.5 years
Custodial sentence of over 6 months and up to and including 30 months	4 years	2 years
Custodial sentence of up to 6 months	2 years	18 months
A custodial sentence includes both an immediate custodial sentence and custodial sentences which are suspended. If a person is released from custody on licence, then the rehabilitation period will begin at the end of the licence period.
For example if a person was sentenced to 180 hours of community service then the rehabilitation period would begin once the hours of community service had been completed.

Rehabilitation periods for sentences which begin on the date of conviction

The following table sets out the rehabilitation period for sentences / disposals that do not have buffer periods. The rehabilitation period starts on the date of conviction:

Sentence / Disposal	Adults (18 & over)	Youth (18 & under)
Fine	12 months	6 months
Licence Endorsement	5 years	2.5 years
Driving Disqualification	Last day of ban	Last day of ban
Compensation order	Once paid	Once paid
For example if an adult was convicted of drink driving (driving with excess alcohol) and was disqualified for 18 months (rehabilitation period 18 months) and fined (rehabilitation period 12 months). They would receive a DR10 driving licence endorsement (rehabilitation period 5 years). The total rehabilitation period for this person would be 5 years, beginning from the date of conviction.

Where a person receives multiple punishments, the rehabilitation period is always the longest period that applies.

Question: When can the police require a breath test?
Answer: Any person who is or was driving, attempting to drive, or who is or was in charge of a motor vehicle on a road or any public place (e.g. a pub car park or a garage forecourt) may be required by the police to provide a breath test to ascertain whether or not the alcohol in their system exceeds the maximum prescribed legal limit.

The request must be made by a police officer in uniform but can only be made if one of the following situations apply:-
- the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect that the person has committed or is currently committing a moving traffic offence; or
- the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect that the person driving/attempting to drive/in charge of the vehicle has consumed alcohol; or
- the police officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person driving/attempting to drive/in charge of a motor vehicle was involved in an accident.

Question: What happens if I fail the preliminary road side breath test but pass an evidential breath test at the Police station?
Answer: The preliminary road side breath test is, in essence, a screening test that is carried out in order to provide an indication as to whether the proportion of alcohol in a persons system is likely to exceed the maximum prescribed legal limit. If a person fails the preliminary road side breath test, they will be arrested and taken to the police station in order to provide an evidential specimen. The evidential breath testing machine at the police station is much more accurate and it may be possible, in certain circumstances, that readings from an evidential breath testing machine may prove that the alcohol in a persons system does not exceed the maximum prescribed legal limit, despite the fact a preliminary road side breath test indicated that this may not be the case. This is especially true if the time between providing a preliminary breath test and an evidential specimen is considerable or the accused was only fractionally over the limit at the time of the road side breath test. In scenarios like this where a person provides an evidential breath specimen that proves the alcohol in their system does not exceed the maximum prescribed legal limit, despite failing a road side breath test, no charges will usually be brought against them. In serious cases (such as a serious road traffic accident resulting in serious injury or fatality) the police may seek to prove that a driver whose level of alcohol in their system was under the maximum legal prescribed limit at the time an evidential specimen was obtained, was nevertheless above the maximum legal prescribed limit at the time of the incident. This is known as a 'back calculation'.

Question: What are the possible defences to a drink driving charge?
Answer: The hip-flask defence: A person should not be convicted of drink driving (driving with excess alcohol) when they can prove that alcohol had been consumed AFTER the alleged offence and BEFORE they provided a specimen for analysis and had that alcohol not been consumed then the proportion of alcohol in their breath, blood or urine would not have exceeded the maximum legal prescribed limit. The courts will make the assumption that the level of alcohol in a defendants body at the time of the alleged offence was not less than the level of alcohol in a defendants body at the time a breath, blood or urine specimen was provided for analysis unless the defence can rebut this assumption by adducing evidence to the contrary. The burden of proof is on the defence to adduce factual evidence relating to their activities, movements and alcohol consumption between the time of the alleged offence and the time at which an evidential specimen was provided. Expert evidence is usually required from a scientist or pathologist relating to the elimination of alcohol from the defendants body. Expert advice and representation from a solicitor specialising in drink driving laws is crucial in preparing the best possible defence to a drink driving charge.

Question: Can I avoid a driving ban if I was driving due to an emergency or my drink was spiked?
Answer: Where a person is convicted of an offence involving an obligatory driving disqualification such as driving with excess alcohol, which carries a minimum mandatory driving disqualification of 12 months. The court may, for 'special reasons' and if they see fit, order a disqualification for a shorter period or decide not to disqualify at all.

Special reasons no to disqualify could include:

- The journey being embarked upon due to an emergency. If the driver can satisfy the court that the journey was what amounts to a genuine emergency, then a driving ban may be avoided.
- Being guilty of driving with excess alcohol as a result of a drivers drinks being laced with alcohol (spiked) without their knowledge.
- Moving the vehicle to prevent a hazard or an accident.
If a driver was under EXTREME duress, for example if a driver was driving while over the maximum legal prescribed drink drive limit due to death threats or the fear of EXTREME and IMMINENT physical injury and was literally fleeing for their life, this could possibly be seen as a special reason not to disqualify by the courts upon conviction of drink driving. This line of defence may only succeed if the danger was immediate or imminent. Once the threat or danger becomes ineffective, the driver must stop driving, if they fail to do so, special reasons will not apply. Once this defence has been raised in court it is up to the prosecution to disprove it. 
